---
layout: page
title: About
---

I can distinctly remember the cloudy February day when I first read Faustino
Ballvé's *Essentials of Economics*. I had been brought up with a working
understanding of economics, but Ballvé's book made the discipline click with me
even more than the summer-term microeconomics course I had taken at Cornell a
couple years before. It's an easy book, one which an interested layman can read
in a weekend, and which will benefit her for the rest of her life. Divided into
ten lessons on everything from Capital, Labor, and Wages to What Economics is
*Not* About, *Essentials of Economics* is the perfect primer on the Austrian
school of pure economics. The Austrian school is built on the idea that
economics should be a discipline distinct from history and statistics---focusing
instead on the laws which govern human action and the inescapable consequences
of that action. While unorthodox in the modern age, this approach to studying
the world makes economics a discipline not just for the professional or
academic, but for every citizen to understand.

While it is technically out-of-print, I believe that physical editions of this
text are still being distributed by the
[Ludwig von Mises Institute](https://mises.org/library/essentials-economics),
which also distributes this book in a proper ebook format. Working
independently, I have put together this digital edition to help revive interest
in this forgotten classic, and to provide a helpful resource on the essentials
of economics in an easily-accessible form for all people---in the spirit of
Ballvé's original work.

Below I have reconstructed a biography of the author as best I can from the
various sources I could conjure up from the depths of the web, both in English
and Catalan. Though sadly very little about him is now known, Faustino Ballvé
remains one of the most interesting intellectual figures I am aware of.

---

At various times a lawyer, politician, refugee, and professor, Faustino Ballvé
Pallisé lived a life unparalleled by any in his field. He was born in 1887 in
Barcelona, and would play an integral part in shaping the politics of his native
Catalonia up through the end of the Spanish Civil War. He studied law at the
University of Barcelona, earned his doctorate at the University of Madrid, and
then went on to study in Berlin and London, where he began to specialize in the
field of economics. When he returned, he worked as a lawyer at the German
consulate in Barcelona.

Politics was a keen interest in Ballvé’s life, who had been the editor of a
republican paper as a young adult. In 1925, he helped found a Catalan republican
party which would later join with the Radical Socialists to become the Catalan
wing of Manuel Azaña’s Republican Left in 1935. Acting as a leader of the
Catalan Republican Left and as a member of the Spanish Court of Deputies
representing Barcelona City, Ballvé was a key player in Spanish politics at the
onset of the Civil War in 1936. But when Azaña’s Republicans lost the war and
the Nationalists came to power, he fled the country. He went first to France,
the destination of many of his fellow political refugees, and finally arrived in
Mexico in 1942 aboard the refugee ship Nyassa. In addition to his legal practice
in Mexico City, Ballvé took on two professorships—one in economics at the Mexico
Institute of Technology, and the other in law at the National Autonomous
University of Mexico. He died in 1958.

<p align="center">
<img alt="A young Faustino Ballvé, courtesy of Wikimedia Commons" src="/assets/ballve.jpg" title="A young Faustino Ballvé, courtesy of Wikimedia Commons" />
</p>

It is perhaps most remarkable that a man who spent his forties fighting
alongside socialists and anarchists against fascist counter-revolutionaries in
Spain would become known in Europe and America as an exponent of free market
economics. Yet such was the rich depth of Ballvé’s life and work. In 1942,
Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises visited Mexico City to deliver a series of
lectures on the economic problems which faced the country. Ballvé’s acquaintance
with Mises during that time led to a long-lasting correspondence and friendship
between the two scholars. In 1956, Ballvé published the book that would become
his legacy—*Diez lecciones de economía*, which we know in the United States as
*Essentials of Economics*.

<p align="center">
<img alt="An old Faustino Ballvé, courtesy of the Foundation for Economic Education" src="/assets/ballve2.jpg" title="An old Faustino Ballvé, courtesy of the Foundation for Economic Education" />
</p>

A comprehensive survey of economic history, theory, and application in only one
hundred pages, Ballvé’s book became an instant hit. Within a year it had been
translated into French by Raoul Audouin, with numerous emendations and
expansions which were approved of by Ballvé himself. In America, Arthur
Goddard’s English translation (which made use of many of the French additions)
was funded by Harold W. Luhnow and the William Volker Fund, and was promoted by
Leonard Reed and the Foundation for Economic Education. Although largely
forgotten today, Ballvé’s work remains a remarkably relevant and accessible
primer on economics which all would do well to read, and a testament to the
similarly remarkable life and times of its unusual author.

--- Jack VanDrunen, 8 Feb. 2018
