---
layout: narrative
title: "Capital, Labor, and Wages"
author: "Faustino Ballvé"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 7
---

*Utility and disutility. Production as creative. Capital and profit.
Labor and wages. The "wages-fund" theory. The "iron law of wages." The
labor theory of value. "Social injustice."*

The essence of the market could be aptly described by saying that *it
consists in obtaining utilities in exchange for disutilities*.

Utilities can be either goods or services, although the former almost
always to some extent comprise the latter, even if only by virtue of the
fact that the commodities in question are placed at the disposal of the
consumers. A disutility consists in the deprivation one experiences from
the lack of something or in the pains one takes to render some service.

This exchange of utilities for disutilities occurs directly more often
than one might think. The black market in time of peace in countries
more or less socialist, and in all countries in time of war, is, in
fact, the real market and almost always involves direct barter
transactions, since the scarcity of goods and services under such
conditions causes people to consider money as of little worth. Normally,
however, this exchange is effected indirectly through the medium of
money. One does not engage in barter; one buys or sells. But this in no
way alters the essential character of the market, because whoever pays
money for a commodity has first obtained the cash in exchange for some
disutility, by the expenditure of some kind of effort, and whoever sells
a commodity for money can use the cash thus
obtained to buy something that, for its purchaser, will be a utility
and, for its seller, a disutility.

The disutility in exchange for which a utility (i.e., a commodity) is
obtained in the market is what is called *production*. This is the
physical and mental exertion needed to place a commodity at the disposal
of the consumer. In this sense we are all producers, just as we are all
consumers. Producer and consumer are not members of two distinct social
classes; production and consumption are rather two functions that
everyone performs every day without even realizing it. However, in the
strictly economic sense, a producer is anyone in the business of
supplying the market with utilities. A producer is thus not only one who
cultivates the soil or manufactures machines or consumers' goods, but
anyone who is engaged in placing utilities within reach of the consumer,
for him to take or to leave. From the economic point of view, things are
not made or services rendered; *utilities are produced*, since the
ultimate stage in the whole productive process is that at which these
utilities become available to the purchaser.

*Production* signifies creation, though not, of course, in the strict
sense of the word. As Lavoisier said, nothing in this world is either
gained or lost; everything is simply transformed into something else.
But to transform iron into a machine or gold into a jewel, or even to
transform mere possibilities for travel into a route available to the
tourist on vacation, is, from the economic point of view, an act of
creation. Economically considered, creation is the realization of an
idea, the accomplishment of a purpose. A *producer*, then, is one who,
in a general way, converts possibilities into actualities by setting
himself a goal and then employing the means to attain it. The sole
producer, in this sense, is the *entrepreneur*. It is a mistake to refer
to capitalists, technicians, and workers as *productive forces*. No one
but the entrepreneur is a producer; the rest simply provide the services
and materials of which he avails himself in carrying on the process of
production.

The means of which the entrepreneur makes use
are *capital* and *labor*. Capital consists of all the material factors
that the entrepreneur employs to keep production in progress, from the
land, buildings, machinery, and equipment, to the cash needed to
maintain the cycle of production through reinvestment of the proceeds.
It thus includes money as well as things, though the latter too are
expressed in monetary terms in the calculations of the entrepreneur. The
capital invested in an enterprise can be the property of the individual
entrepreneur, or it can be provided by a number of people: one or more
active entrepreneurs, either on their own or in association with
capitalists who exercise no initiative in the conduct of the enterprise
but share in its risks.

From the economic point of view, all of them are entrepreneurs because
they all assume the risk. In such cases, they generally form an
association with a juridical personality, which constitutes the
enterprise. Since, as we have seen, *capital goods* can consist of
things whose value is expressible in monetary terms, and since the
owners of these capital goods run a risk, we can define *capital as the
money risked in an enterprise*.

What is the specific compensation received for the use of capital goods?
It has been held by some to be rent and by others to be interest. Both
opinions are erroneous and involve the possibility of confusion.
Economics employs the term "rent" for something else entirely. Interest
too is an altogether different thing from what it is generally believed
to be. *The specific remuneration of capital is profit* and is
characterized by the fact that it is essentially uncertain and aleatory.
The capitalist runs the risk involved in the enterprise; he can make a
profit or suffer losses. *Profit is justified, then, by the risk
incurred*.

---

The other factor of production is *labor*. This is a disutility that one
takes upon oneself in exchange for a utility, viz., wages. "Cursed is
the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of
thy life; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread," God says to
Adam.[^fn1] To be sure,
throughout the ages labor has had its panegyrists, from the ancient
Romans, who spoke of it as the foremost of the
virtues (*labor prima virtus*), to our own contemporaries, who have paid
tribute to the "dignity" and the "joy" of labor and extolled "creative"
work. Nevertheless, in the economic sense, *what is done purely for
pleasure is not labor*---e.g., the work of the amateur artist or even
that of the genius who feels himself called to a destiny to which he
sacrifices everything; for neither of these activities is a means to an
end; each is rather an end in itself. Labor is solely the more or less
onerous exertion undertaken in exchange for the satisfaction of wants
and desires and as a means of attaining this end.

A utility for the entrepreneur, labor is performed in exchange for
wages, which represent for the worker utilities that he considers as
more valuable than the effort he expends in return for them: the support
of his family, the preservation of good health, opportunities for
education and, as far as possible, recreation, and the possibility of
periodic vacations and retirement in old age.

It has been said that labor is not a commodity, but in the economic
domain this is not true at all. What is not a commodity is the worker,
any more than is the entrepreneur or the capitalist. But labor,
considered as a service, is a commodity, just like the services provided
by the entrepreneur. *Everything that has a price in the market is a
commodity* and, as such, is subject to the law of supply and demand.

In the so-called labor market, as in every market, each party seeks to
receive more than he gives. The boss gives for the labor of the worker
an amount that he considers less than the service he is getting in
exchange; the worker, for his part, renders a service that he considers
as less valuable than his wage. And the same holds true of the
entrepreneur when he renders on behalf of the enterprise services that
go beyond those concerned with minimizing his own risks, viz., when he
performs some technical task or seeks to reduce the risks of his
associates. For this kind of service he receives from the enterprise a
remuneration that for him is worth more, and for his associates less,
than the effort he puts forth. If he asks too much, the capitalists turn
him down and seek some other, less expensive technician; if they offer
him too little, it is he who goes in search of
other capitalists. His situation in this respect is no different from
that of any day laborer.

---

In the spirit of the classical school, an attempt has been made to find
objective laws that would determine wages independently of the will of
the parties concerned. The oldest is the so-called *wages-fund theory*,
which was developed principally by Price, Smith, McCulloch, Mill, and
Fawcett. According to this theory, the height of wages is determined
automatically in an economic community (what is meant is the economy of
a country) by the portion of capital that the entrepreneurs can devote
to wages (the wages fund) and by the number of workers who are to share
in it. If prosperity permits the entrepreneurs to augment the wages
fund, each worker gets an increase in pay. If the opposite occurs, or if
the number of workers becomes greater as a consequence of an increase in
the population, the pay of each worker is correspondingly reduced. If a
group of workers succeeds in some way in winning a wage increase, this
can only be at the expense of the rest of their comrades in the working
class.

This theory, whose defects we shall consider later, was revived in a
different form at the end of the last century by Böhm-Bawerk and
Taussig. According to them, we should be concerned, not with nominal or
money wage rates, but with real wages, i.e., with the goods that the
worker can buy with the money in his pay envelope. The existing supply
of goods in a country is limited. This stock of goods has to be divided
among such uses as the maintenance and improvement of the material
factors of production, so that it can be kept in progress and even
expanded; the maintenance of the personnel and materials needed for
public services, from the post office to the army, paid for out of
taxes; and, finally, the support of the participants in the process of
production, from the entrepreneur to the worker. There is no point in
raising money wages if the goods themselves do not increase
proportionately, because then prices will rise and in the end the worker
will be able to purchase no more with his new salary than he could with
the old.

Prior in origin, but more recent in its
formulation, is the doctrine of the *iron law of wages*. This was early
suggested by the physiocrats Turgot and Necker and later given
definitive form by Ferdinand Lassalle (1825--1864), the founder of the
German workers' movement, at that time to some extent allied with Marx;
the influence of his ideas was still considerable in the German Social
Democratic party before the Second World War (e.g., in the famous Erfurt
program) and even in the Second International. According to this
doctrine, the average wage always tends to be reduced to the minimum
amount of indispensable necessities of life required to maintain and
replace the labor force at the level of bare physiological subsistence.
It cannot be raised much above this without resulting in an excessive
birth rate among the working population, whose increased pressure on the
labor market would then depress wages. It cannot, on the other hand,
fall far below the subsistence minimum without adversely affecting the
birth rate among the workers and giving rise to emigration, a reduction
in their numbers, and a scarcity of labor.

Karl Marx founded his doctrine of wages on his theory of value. The
value of a commodity depends on the amount of labor required to produce
it. The labor of a skilled worker represents a multiple of that of an
unskilled hired hand. In like manner, the value of the worker is
measured by the cost of supporting him and of rearing and training a
replacement with precisely the degree of skill needed; and the training,
maintenance, and replacement of a skilled worker costs a multiple of the
amount needed for the same purposes in the case of an ordinary unskilled
laborer. This is what determines the price of labor in the market, i.e.,
wages. But the cost of supporting a worker is always less than what his
labor produces. This difference is the *surplus value* which the
entrepreneur retains, thereby depriving the worker of *the full proceeds
of his labor*.

---

In criticism of these doctrines, the first point to be noted is that
they are not scientific explanations of the way in which the
mechanism of wages actually functions in the
economy, but political lucubrations that are supposed to explain why the
lower classes live in penury and to constitute a basis for a program of
social reform. Even before Marx, Adam Smith, the founder of the
classical school---which has been gratuitously accused of seeking to
defend egoism and to justify servitude to those whom fortune has
favored---had devoted a part of his famous book to a moving description
of the sufferings of the poor, castigating the evils of the economic
system of his age and proposing a number of reforms designed to redress
what is today called *social injustice*.

All this is perfectly natural and even laudable. Neither economics nor
anything else is studied solely out of pure curiosity to know the truth
for its own sake, but in order to provide a sound basis for appropriate
action. On the other hand, nothing is more commendable than to devote
oneself to improving the lot of one's fellow men. But, in the first
place, it is not scientific to confound matters of fact with wishes and
desires, and even less to distort the facts in order to justify one's
desires, however noble the latter may be. In the second place, there is
no doubt that any schemes for reform that are based on erroneous beliefs
about matters of fact are doomed to failure. An ostrichlike policy can
lead to nothing but disaster. One has to look the facts boldly in the
face. Only the truth can serve as a basis for successful action. This is
what makes modern critical economics a science. It does not give advice;
it is concerned purely and exclusively with matters of fact brought to
light by honest investigation and rendered coherent by reflection. And,
as regards wages, the facts are, essentially, as follows:

1.  It is not accurate to say that wages depend on economic conditions
in a particular community or country. They ultimately depend on
international competition. This determines the prices of raw materials
and manufactured products on the world market, from which no nation can
withdraw if it does not want to be eliminated in this competition; and,
by the same token, the latter determines the margin that remains, after
other expenses have been paid, for the compensation of the entrepreneur
and the worker. It even directly determines
the height of wages because, other things being equal, the worker always
goes where he can get the best pay.

2.  It is not true that in every country the total amount of wages is
determined by the fund that production can make available for that
purpose or by the existing supply of consumers' goods or by the minimum
generally needed by the worker for his bare subsistence and replacement
as such, and that this amount is then equally divided among the workers.
Even in countries in which minimum wages are fixed by law, each branch
of production, as well as each enterprise within it, has its own rate of
wages determined, on the one hand, by the margin left over by
competition from the prices of its products, and, on the other hand, by
the greater or lesser and more or less organized supply of available
labor. Nor are the workers in any particular branch of production
content, for their part, to accept as payment for their services an
amount determined solely by the fact that it is the prevailing rate of
wages in other branches of production. On the contrary: they struggle to
obtain higher wages if this is at all possible as a result of the
scarcity of labor in their own branch or through the power of their
trade-union; and even then the especially skillful or productive worker,
who considers his labor as having a greater utility, demands a
correspondingly higher wage than his comrades, and, if he does not get
it, withholds his labor and offers it to another entrepreneur who better
appreciates its value.

3.  Nor is it precisely correct to say that wages are paid from the
capital of the entrepreneur; they are ultimately paid by the consumer,
for they constitute one of the elements that enter into the formation of
the sales price. But even if this were not so, the wages-fund doctrine
does not provide any criterion for determining how the wages fund is
established.

4.  Equally worthless as a criterion is the minimum indispensable for
the nurture and subsistence of the worker. There is no objective
standard for determining this amount. The worker of the present day, if
he avoids ostentatious extravagance or intemperate self-indulgence,
lives much better than Croesus in all his
opulence or Louis XIV in all his splendor; and yet he complains of
living poorly, and we agree with him. According to statistics, and
taking into account fluctuations in the value of money, the real wages
and standard of living of the French worker have doubled since 1848, and
those of the American worker have quintupled; but as their material and
cultural needs have likewise increased, their wages continue to
represent, psychologically, a subsistence minimum. That it is
practically impossible to state precisely what this minimum is may be
seen from the fact that of two workers of equal competence and with the
same family obligations and the same wages, one lives well and is able
to save, while the other lives poorly and finds his pay inadequate.

5.  It is not true that the value of commodities is measured by the
quantity of labor they contain, or that the value of a worker is
measured by the cost of his nurture, sustenance, and replacement by a
worker in the same category. The first of these doctrines has already
been refuted; and in regard to the second, it must be objected that when
an entrepreneur hires a worker, he takes into account neither the cost
of the latter's nurture and training nor that of his present necessities
as a qualified worker nor the ease or difficulty with which the worker
may be able to rear and educate his own offspring as he himself was
educated. The sole consideration in hiring a worker is his fitness for
the job and the price of his labor. A good proof of this is provided by
those so-called "white-collar proletarians" who receive salaries that
neither compensate for what they cost their parents nor make it possible
for their own children to receive the same education that they did.

6.  The fact is that wages are determined by supply and demand, and not
in a general way, but in each case, by branches of production, by
enterprises within each one of these branches, and by individuals within
each enterprise, on the basis of the existing need for labor, its
abundance or scarcity, and the productive capability of each particular
worker. This holds true not only in countries with a system of free
enterprise but also in those with a more or less interventionist policy,
like Mexico, and even in countries with a
socialist economy, like Russia, where, as Davies
notes,[^fn2] the differences in
wages among the various branches of production and among individuals
within each one of them are much greater than they are in the United
States. This is evidenced by Stakhanovism and by the intelligentsia, a
class of scientists, artists, and political functionaries that enjoys
the greatest abundance amidst the general penury.

Up to now no better method of determining wage rates has been found than
that of the market. The attempts to give *to each according to his
needs* and to demand *from each according to his abilities* have failed
every time they have been made (as they were in Russia at the beginning
of the Bolshevik Revolution), for the simple reason that everything that
the worker earns in wages, beyond what he would receive through the
unhampered operation of the mechanism of supply and demand, he has to
pay out in his capacity as a consumer because of the increase in prices
thereby brought about. Nor is it possible, as we shall see later, to
raise wages at the expense of entrepreneurial profits.

7.  From what has already been said, it also follows that it is absurd
to attempt *to give the worker a share in the management and the
profits*. Profits are the compensation of the entrepreneur for the risk
he assumes. For him to be able to take the risk exclusively on his own
account, he requires all the independence correlative with his
responsibility. The worker assumes neither the risk nor the
responsibility of the enterprise and therefore has no claim to
participation either in its management or in its profits. One can
speculate about the possibility of an economy without entrepreneurial
risk. But the workers' participation in the management and profits of
the enterprise is a hybrid and, as such, sterile solution of the
problem.

[^fn1]:
    Gen. 3:17, 19

[^fn2]:
    Joseph E. Davies,
    *Mission to Moscow* (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1941).
