---
layout: narrative
title: "Preface to the English-Language Edition"
author: Arthur Goddard
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 2
---

In his preface, included here in translation, to the original Mexican
edition of this book, Sr. Lic. Gustavo R. Velasco, himself a
distinguished scholar in both law and economics, as well as an
accomplished linguist, points out that elementary introductions to
economic science comparable in clarity, authoritativeness, and
simplicity to Sr. Ballvé's work are exceedingly rare, not only in
Spanish, but also in other languages. And, indeed, within a year of its
publication, a French translation by M. Raoul Audoin made its appearance
to fill the need of readers of that language in Continental Europe,
where the book soon received the acclaim it deserved.

Certainly the same need exists in English and has existed for some time.
There are, to be sure, a number of excellent treatises on economics,
some of them rather voluminous, which expound the subject with an
exhaustiveness that should satisfy the most demanding student. But when
one looks for simpler and briefer presentations, designed, not for
specialists, but for the average educated person who seeks enlightenment
in regard to the economic questions underlying the great issues of our
day, there is little to be found that is altogether satisfactory. No
doubt those who have taken the pains to acquire a thorough knowledge of
economics may say that there really is no substitute for the consummate
understanding that only the study of the works of the masters in this
field can provide; anything else is necessarily superficial at best and
is likely to be open to sophisticated criticism. This much may be
granted. But the gap between the erudition of the scholars---a
relatively small group, whose primary influence is in the classroom and
the lecture hall---and the ignorance, not to say prejudices, of even
otherwise well-educated men and women who have not specialized in
economic science, has not been left a vacuum. There is no dearth of
pamphlets and popular books in which inveterate errors and fallacies
long since refuted continue to be given currency. As for the textbooks
used in the secondary schools and the colleges, besides being often dull
and pedantic, they fail, in many instances, to reflect the present state
of economic science, deal with much that is strictly irrelevant to it,
and are, in any case, unsuited to the requirements of the citizen who
wishes to inform himself accurately concerning the essentials of that
subject so that he may have a well-founded, rationally defensible
opinion concerning the consequences to be expected from the various
proposed policies open to his choice in his capacity as a voter in a
democracy.

It was chiefly for this type of reader that the "ten lessons in
economics" here presented were intended. The peculiar merit of this book
is its combination of brevity, readability, and accuracy. Here the
reader will find, within the compass of a few short chapters, a synoptic
survey of the essential principles of economics and an application of
them in the critique of popular doctrines and policies, the whole
illustrated with apt historical references and supported by solid
learning. This unusual blend of pedagogic skill and sound scholarship
gives the work its unique character and makes it ideally suited to fill
a need that has, up to now, been left, for the most part, unsatisfied.
Its translation into English will have been justified if it helps to
clear up some of the grave misunderstanding and confusion that infect
much of the popular discussion of economic questions and to correct the
faulty opinions that currently constitute the main obstacle to the
diffusion of prosperity and well-being.

The English version is based, for the most part, on the original
Spanish-language edition, but it takes account also of some of the
substantive changes that, as we learn from M. Pierre Lhoste-Lachaume's
preface to the French translation, were introduced into the text of the
latter at his suggestion. To be sure, not all the additions, deletions,
emendations, and rearrangements made in the French version have been
incorporated into the English text, for in some cases they appear to
have been made---as the editor frankly admitted---chiefly in the
interest of adapting the book to the concerns of the French public or of
bringing certain points into sharper relief in the light of contemporary
European conditions. However, in view of Sr. Ballvé's express statement,
in the foreword he wrote for the French translation, of his approval of
the revised text, the latter has been followed here wherever it seemed
to represent an improvement, in vigor and consistency of expression,
over the Spanish original.

At the same time, an effort has been made to assist the reader by the
citation, wherever possible, of the original text and title of books
quoted or referred to by the author in their Spanish translations. In
this connection, indebtedness is gratefully acknowledged to the courtesy
of George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., for permission to quote from William
Arthur Lewis' *The Principles of Economic Planning*, 1949.

Arthur Goddard
