---
layout: narrative
title: "International Trade"
author: "Faustino BallvÃ©"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 10
---

*A quotation from Karl Marx. Caravans and trading posts. The world
market. Marts, trades halls and exchanges, fairs and expositions.
Commodity exchanges, warrants, and transactions at long distance and
involving deferred delivery. Futures. Tribunals of commercial
arbitration. Money-changers, bills of exchange, securities, and the
stock exchange*.

> Through its exploitation of the world market, the bourgeoisie has given
> a cosmopolitan character to production in every country. To the great
> chagrin of the reactionaries, it has deprived industry of its national
> character. The old, established national industries have been destroyed
> or are on the point of being destroyed. They have been supplanted by new
> industries, whose production poses a vital problem for all civilized
> nations---industries that no longer process indigenous raw materials,
> but raw materials bought in the most distant regions and whose products
> are consumed not only at home, but in every part of the world.

In place of the old wants, satisfied by the products of the country, we
find new wants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of the
most remote lands and diverse climes. In place of the old national
isolation and local self-sufficiency, we have universal trade and the
interdependence of nations.

This is how Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, in their famous *Communist
Manifesto* of 1848, describe, in vivid fashion, the economy of their
age. But in spite of the fact that Marx did his
writing in the library of the British Museum,
which at that time was the largest in the world, he was not, it would
seem, well versed in history; for even in the most remote eras of
antiquity we find the famous *caravans*---already mentioned in the
*Thousand and One Nights*---transporting products between the farthest
reaches of the Orient and the most distant lands of the Occident then
known.

Centuries before Socrates and Plato, Tyrian traders plied their fragile
craft as far as the Atlantic coast of the Iberian peninsula. Later, the
Greeks and the Phoenicians established *trading posts* along the
Mediterranean littoral as far as the mouth of the Rhone, and the Romans,
sailing beyond England, penetrated all the way to Ireland.

The Tartars and the Mongols carried on a commercial traffic from the
Pacific to the Danube, whence they continued as far as the Baltic and
the North Sea. From here the Vikings carried their trade to the coasts
of Africa and apparently, as certain competent historians assure us,
traversed the icy seas, by way of Bering Strait, to America. Thus, we
find in the extreme Orient the most distant products of the Occident,
like steel blades from Toledo and the amber of the Baltic; and, on the
other hand, the silks, brocades, rugs, jewelry, and perfumes of the
Orient found their way as far as England and Sweden.

Even the most cursory perusal of any treatise on commercial
geography[^fn1] should suffice
to convince one that there has always been a world economy constituting
a unified totality. No matter how superficially we survey the daily life
of any person, even the least civilized, we shall find that he
continually, and without even being aware of it, depends on the products
of distant lands. We need hardly mention the machinery produced in the
great industrial countries like England, France, Belgium, Germany, and
the United States, and dispersed all over the world, or the perfumes of
Grasse or the silks of Lyon, which are used by elegant ladies
everywhere, or the woolens of Australia, which clothe the middle and the
upper classes of every country; nor need we speak of products as local
as coffee, tea, and tobacco, which are in universal use, or of the fine
woods of the Orient and Central America, which
adorn the homes of people in every latitude. In the houses of even the
most humble inhabitants of the Orient we shall find cooking utensils and
sewing machines manufactured in Europe and the United States, just as we
find in the Occident cloves and spices of Oriental provenance and
countless knickknacks from China and Japan.

In a word, the true market is the *world market*. At the center of this
market, in the Middle Ages, were the small Italian republics, especially
those of Genoa and Venice, and the free cities of the Hanseatic League,
as well as their neighbors, the Flemish ports, in particular that of
Antwerp. It was here that the characteristic institutions of the world
market---the *trades halls* and the *exchanges*---as well as the
peculiar forms of mercantile transactions involving operations at a
distance and deferred
delivery[^fn2] first came into
being.

The most primitive form of market is the local *mart* or trading center,
which still exists today among almost all the peoples of the world.
Later, markets or *fairs* were held regularly, generally every week, in
which the indigenous merchandise of the region was offered for sale:
cereals, milk products, cattle and meat, certain textiles, household
utensils, etc. These were followed later still, not by national, but by
international markets, at which traders from all parts of the world
would make a stop as they crossed back and forth along the trade routes.
These merchants seldom brought with them the goods they had for sale but
kept them on deposit in *warehouses*, in ships anchored in the harbor,
or on the docks of the so-called *ports of call*. They made their sales
by exhibiting samples of their merchandise or simply on the basis of
qualitative classifications, which means that what they had to offer
consisted of fungible commodities: consumers' goods and raw materials,
like fibers and minerals, susceptible of being qualitatively graded and
interchangeable within each category. The places where these merchants
congregated in Italy and Spain were called, at the end of the Middle
Ages and at the beginning of the modern era, *loggias* or *lonjas*. The
most ancient of these trades halls are probably those founded by the
Catalans in Alexandria and the celebrated *llotja de mar* of
Barcelona of the fourteenth century, still
standing in a magnificent Gothic edifice of which a smaller imitation
was later made in Valencia. (There is also a French *loge de mer* at
Perpignan.) It should not be forgotten that international maritime
traffic from the Baltic to Constantinople was regulated for four
centuries by the first document having the character of a commercial
code, the *Consulado de mar*, apparently drawn up in the thirteenth
century at Barcelona, although the first known edition of it dates from
1484.

In the same period, a family of Dutch exchange brokers named Van Burse
founded a similar institution in Bruges, whence comes the word "bourse,"
which passed to Antwerp and into almost all other countries except the
Anglo-Saxon. An analogous institution, called the Royal Exchange, was
founded in London by Sir Thomas Gresham (whose name has been given to
the supposed law---undoubtedly attributable to him, but apparently first
formulated by Copernicus---according to which bad money drives good
money from the market). In modern times it has once again become the
fashion to hold *expositions*, sometimes national, but chiefly
international, the most famous of which is the Leipzig trade fair in
Germany. At these expositions the articles displayed and traded are not
fungible commodities, but almost exclusively manufactured or finished
goods, such as, at Leipzig, fine furs, books, machinery, and precision
instruments.

The object of the trades halls or *commodity exchanges* is to save space
and time. Present in symbolic form, through their owners or the latters'
agents, are commodities of the most distant provenance: coffee, tea,
sugar, cotton, linen, furs, metals, cereals, etc. The buyers make their
purchases from samples or according to graded classifications of quality
and receive, not the merchandise itself, but an order for its delivery
or simply a negotiable instrument, consisting of an endorsable warehouse
receipt, called a *warrant*. Often the merchandise involved in the
transaction is never seen, but title to it may be transferred by
successive acts of assignment. In this way, transportation over long
distances is avoided. Thus, a parcel of cotton coming from the United
States and actually arriving at Argentina may have been purchased in
London first by a Portuguese, who then resold
it to a Greek, who, in turn, sold it to an Argentinian, the cotton being
still in the field all the while.

But time---that great enemy of the entrepreneur---is also saved by means
of transactions in *futures*, i.e., present contracts for the purchase
or sale of commodities to be delivered at a specified date in the
future. This kind of operation makes it possible for the processor of
raw materials to be sure that he will have them, at a fixed price, when
he needs them and thereby facilitates his calculations in advance of his
entering into sales
contracts.[^fn3]

Such transactions are usually carried on by means of samples or simply
on the basis of qualitative grades (e.g., average Santos coffee, good
middling cotton, etc.), in standardized units and at prices that are
often little more than approximations based on estimates (e.g., of the
alcoholic content of liquids or of the resistance of cotton to twisting,
etc.). Both buyer and seller deposit funds as a guarantee of good faith.
Since transactions of this kind can give rise to misunderstandings and
disputes, the exchanges, and most notably those specializing in
particular commodities, have established *international tribunals of
commercial arbitration*, to which the contracting parties can submit
their case for a decision concerning quality, quantity, and the final
terms of settlement. These organs of arbitration, like the one for
cotton at Liverpool or New York, for coffee at Le Havre, etc., have
justly earned an excellent reputation for their integrity and enjoy a
prestige based on universal respect and esteem. Their decisions are
recognized by almost all the courts of justice in the world as binding
obligations on the contracting parties. The result is that transactions
of this kind, apparently the most difficult and perilous, never give
rise to insoluble conflicts.

In order to meet the monetary needs of international trade, a
*foreign-exchange* market developed. In the early days of international
trade, buyers resorted to money-changers to obtain the foreign money
demanded by the seller. As the handling of specie proved cumbersome,
expensive (because of the costs of transportation and insurance), and
dangerous, the *bill of exchange* was
invented. The buyer in Paris who needed pounds
sterling paid a money-changer francs, in exchange for which he received
from the money-changer an order drawn on the latter's London agent to
pay the bearer pounds sterling to the amount shown. If this bill bore a
signature in which the seller had confidence, he accepted it in payment
and incurred no risk because it was drawn *to the order* of a designated
person, who could *endorse* it over to another person, but it was
payable only to the ultimate bearer whose name appeared last on it.

The person acquiring the bill paid a *premium* for it to the one who
provided him with it, and the amount of this premium remained subject to
the law of the market---i.e., of supply and demand. Those who were in a
position to offer such *instruments of payment* were accustomed to
congregate in a certain place, which was also frequented by those who
needed them, and there competition resulted in the best price for both
buyers and sellers. In Paris these transactions took place as early as
the fourteenth century on the Pont-au-Change. Hence arose the
foreign-exchange or money markets, which later became *stock exchanges*
dealing in all types of securities, because not only was there a need
for instruments of payment, but people also wanted to *invest* money in
*stocks* and *bonds* (loans represented by credit instruments to which
title is transferable, like mortgage debentures) of national or foreign
enterprises or to *place money at interest* by the purchase of
government bonds, national or foreign, constituting claims on the
*public debt*. The *prices quoted* for all these different types of
securities fluctuated, like those of any commodity, according to the law
of supply and demand, the confidence they inspired, or the outlook for
the future of the companies or governments issuing them. For similar
reasons, fluctuations also took place not only in the premiums charged
for instruments of payment in the money market, but also in the rate of
foreign exchange itself, and the law of supply and demand always
resulted in the rate of exchange most acceptable to all concerned.

This is what we could characterize as the normal state of commercial
intercourse between nations, and this too is the
mechanism by which it functions. Its enormous
advantages are easily conceived. They consist essentially in the fact
that every buyer can obtain, almost without leaving his home (because
the telephone, the telegraph, and the facilities provided by *exchange
brokers* render any personal dislocation unnecessary), anything that he
needs, no matter where it comes from. On the other hand, the seller can,
also without leaving his home, and even sometimes without seeing his
merchandise, have it sent anywhere in the world. The commodity and
securities exchanges are mirrors in which are reflected all the vendible
goods in the world in their quantity and quality, and where producers
find registered the needs and anticipations of people everywhere at any
time. This public offer and demand, in free and open competition,
automatically eventuates, in the form of market *quotations*, in the
prices exactly suited to ensure that the producer will not withdraw from
production and that the consumer will not refrain from buying. In a
word, thanks to free trade and the efficient service of exchanges and
*arbitrage* operations (i.e., conjoined purchases and sales to take
advantage of price differentials in differently situated markets), the
result is the *best and cheapest world-wide distribution of goods*.

And yet this system has its detractors and has for some time now been in
a state of *crisis* because its critics have succeeded in influencing
public opinion. Against the world-wide free economy two enemies have
arisen: nationalism and socialism; and another enemy disguised as a
friend: so-called central planning, or the doctrine of the planned
economy. We shall concern ourselves with these three tendencies in the
two succeeding chapters.

[^fn1]:
    *See*, for example,
    Marion Isabel Newbigin, *Commercial Geography* (New York: Henry Holt and
    Company, 1924).

[^fn2]:
    Wilhelm Lexis,
    *Allgemeine Volkswirtschaftslehre* (Berlin: B. G. Teubner, 1910).

[^fn3]:
    *See*
    A. GabarrÃ³ GarcÃ­a, *El sistema de futuros* (Barcelona, 1934) and Charles
    Rist, *PrÃ©cis des mÃ©canismes Ã©conomiques Ã©lÃ©mentaires* (Paris: Librairie
    du Recueil Sirey, 1945).
