---
layout: narrative
title: "Money and Credit"
author: "Faustino Ballvé"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 8
---

*Direct and indirect exchange. Barter and money. The history of money.
Monetary theories. The money market. Credit and interest. Inflation and
deflation. The price of money. Stable money. The gold standard*.

At least since the time of Xenophon attempts have been made to formulate
a completely integrated and coherent theory of money that would provide
a comprehensive explanation of its value and its fluctuations. But what
renders this difficult, not to say impossible, is not only the twofold
function of money as both a medium of exchange and a commodity with a
value of its own but also the interference of psychological and
political factors in monetary affairs. Economists have been able to
ascertain the causes of the value of money in relation to other monetary
systems or to other things and services, but they have not been able to
discover and are hardly likely to discover any single formula that can
explain all these phenomena.

Logically and doubtless also historically, the originary form of the
market and of the division of labor is barter. Direct exchange is
converted into indirect exchange when the owner of something perishable
or having but an intermittent or sporadic utility seeks to trade it
directly for something more durable and more likely to be a regular item
of consumption (salt, wheat, oil, cotton, etc.), in order to obtain with
it, at an opportune time, other things or services that he may need. The
commodity that is procured in the first of
these transactions acquires the character of a *medium of exchange*.
This medium of exchange is then perfected in the form of *money*.

Originally anything that was simply rare---and whose acquisition
therefore involved a certain amount of labor on the part of whoever
obtained it directly from Nature---like the shells of certain molluscs
or the eyeteeth of certain animals, served as money. Later precious
metals were used for this purpose, having a utility in themselves as
well as in their capacity as media of exchange. Since it was both
difficult and dangerous to lay up a great store of these metals, they
were entrusted in the Middle Ages to goldsmiths, who issued receipts for
the amount left with them on deposit. These receipts would then pass
from hand to hand as their holders used them in payment for goods and
services. Hence arose the business of banking. Instead of giving
receipts for the sums placed on deposit with them, the bankers issued
bank notes whose bearers could convert them into metallic money at the
bank of issue, which backed them with the deposits.

In this way money accumulates in banks, and as depositors do not
normally need to have all their money at their immediate disposal, banks
pay them *interest* (with certain exceptions), the amount being smaller
in the case of *demand* deposits, which can be withdrawn by the
depositor at any time without prior notice, and larger in the case of
*time* deposits, which are not payable before a definite date. Keeping
on hand only what is needed to provide for anticipated withdrawals, the
banks *lend* the surplus, charging the borrowers a higher rate of
interest in order to earn a profit and cover their risk, and extend
*credit* to those who merit their confidence or pledge a certain amount
as security. Thus, *bank accounts* and *checks*, which are given and
accepted in lieu of money, make their appearance.

And it is at this point that two kinds of governmental interference
thenceforth take place. First, in order to prevent fraud in regard to
the quality and the quantity of the precious metals serving as money,
the practice of *assaying* and *monetizing* them is established, whereby
they are certified as to weight and purity, stamped into *coins* of
various denominations having a *face value*
fixed by law (so many mills of fine metal for
every one thousand of the alloy), and carefully *minted*. Then the
government proceeds to establish a control over the banks in order to
prevent them from issuing more *fiduciary media* (i.e.,
money-substitutes) than they have in cash on deposit. This control is
entrusted to the *central bank*, to which the government grants a
monopoly over the issuance of bank notes *redeemable* in metallic money.
More recently, these bank notes have been rendered irredeemable and
declared *legal tender*, and the central banks have been authorized to
issue more notes than correspond to their *reserves* of precious metal
or *cash holdings*. Then too, many countries have established an
*embargo* on gold and silver and have withdrawn them from circulation,
reserving them solely for the use of the government or of the central
bank, except in amounts destined for nonmonetary uses. The final step is
taken when the government is free to determine, more or less under the
control of the legislative power, the amount of *fiat money* in
circulation, i.e., paper money that is backed by nothing more in the way
of reserves or security (even though an attempt may be made to hold in
the central bank the greatest possible amount of specie or of foreign
exchange in good repute) than the credit of the government or the
confidence of the people in its fiscal and monetary policy.

This, briefly, has been the sad history of money---a history that has
not been lacking in miracle-workers who profess to see in it happy
auguries full of promise.

Let us now turn our attention to the *theories of money*. These, in the
order in which they have appeared historically, can be reduced to three:
the *quantity* theory, the *qualitative* theory, and the theory of the
*neutrality of money*.

The quantity theory of money was first formulated by Jean Bodin, a
Frenchman (also known as Bodinus, 1520--1596), whom many regard as the
founder of scientific economics. Impressed, no doubt, by the enormous
rise in prices in sixteenth-century Spain consequent upon the
importation of precious metals from the New World, Bodin held that the
value of money in a country is inversely
proportional to the supply of goods on the market: the more money and
the fewer goods, the less value (i.e., *purchasing power*) money has,
and vice versa. The core of truth in this doctrine is the fact that
money is a medium of exchange and, in relation to the goods and services
that can be bought or sold, is subject to the law of supply and demand.
Even today this theory cannot be entirely rejected, but it suffers from
two defects:

1.  It is based on the assumption of an autarkic economy, i.e., that the
money in question circulates only in one country and can purchase only
the commodities for sale in that country; whereas in fact money, as well
as commodities, has an international circulation, so that a country with
an abundant supply of money and a scarcity of goods can be a rich
country if outside its borders there is a scarcity of money and an
abundance of goods.

2.  It is based, moreover, on the assumption that money is nothing but a
medium of exchange, and that its only role in the market is as a means
of payment for goods and services. But money, as we shall see, has other
functions besides, which give it, as it were, a life of its own, and
which appreciably influence its value according to the supply of and the
demand for it.

The qualitative theory, which appears to have been formulated by John
Locke (1632--1704), holds that the value of money is the intrinsic value
of the metal it contains or represents. In this theory as well there is
a core of truth that cannot be disregarded today, but it too fails to
give an exhaustive explanation of the causal factors that determine the
value of money. According to it, the Mexican peso, with the modest gold
reserves in the Bank of Mexico, should be worth much less than what it
is worth today, and, on the other hand, the dollar, with fifty per cent
of the world's gold in Fort Knox, should be worth much
more.[^fn1]

The theory of the neutrality of money, attributed to another great
Englishman, David Hume (1711--1776), was later held by
John Stuart Mill and has since been accepted
by many other economists up to the present day. According to them, money
is merely a *token* of the value of things, or a means of calculating
their value, without there being any reciprocal influence between money,
on the one hand, and goods and services, on the other.

This doctrine goes astray because it is founded on a purely theoretical
and provisional assumption, to which economics has recourse solely as an
heuristic device to facilitate the study of the phenomena of the market,
namely, that all exchange is essentially barter. But this methodological
postulate, framed merely as a means of rendering an understanding of the
market easier by isolating it, for specific purposes, from all other
economic phenomena, in no way corresponds to what actually takes place.
In the real world, there is interposed, between the goods exchanged on
the market, another commodity, viz., money. Things are not exchanged for
things, but for money, and the relation between every commodity and
money is subject to the law of supply and demand: a thing is dear or
cheap according as it costs more or less money. There is thus a
fundamental difference between barter and the market properly so called.
Barter is direct and bilateral, whereas the market, as expressed in
money prices, is indirect and multilateral. Hence, it follows that
money, as a commodity that is exchanged for things, has a value of its
own that is determined by market factors, and in particular by its
better or poorer quality and by its abundance or scarcity. More or fewer
goods are sold for money according to the value attributed to it. One
money is preferred to another. It is valued more highly if it is scarce
and less highly if it is abundant. This does not mean that it therefore
ceases to be a token of payment, but it is not only that; it is also a
commodity in its own right, with a utility derived from its material and
its function and a price determined by the demand for it and the supply
of it.

Thus, none of the three theories of money that we have summarized is
adequate in itself; all three must be taken together. Each one of them
explains only a part of the truth, and perhaps something still remains
to be explained. In any case, money is a medium and a token of exchange,
as the theory of its neutrality asserts. It
also has an intrinsic value as money by virtue of its material content
as well as its specific utility, e.g., in making hoarding possible, as
the qualitative theory holds. And, as the quantity theory recognizes,
the purchasing power of money stands in a more or less mathematical
relation to the supply of and the demand for goods on the market.

This brings us to the concept of the *money market*, about which there
likewise prevails a good deal of confusion. People speak of money as
abundant or scarce, as cheap or dear, without making any distinction
between *money* and *credit*, although the two are altogether different
from each other in their mechanism.

When businessmen speak of money as scarce or abundant, as "tight" or
"easy," they are not, in fact, referring to money at all, but to credit,
especially bank credit, or the loan market. Thus, not long ago it was
reported that the Bank of England had raised the *discount rate* on
short-term (i.e., ninety-day) loans. This brought about an increase in
the *price of money*---i.e., the *rate of interest*---another matter
about which a fundamental error has prevailed since even before the days
of the classical economists.

It is commonly said that "money begets money." Indeed, some economists
have gone so far as to assert that interest is the specific product of
money, and that a loan is the *renting of money*. He who needs money
hires it; that is to say, he borrows it and pays the lender, by way of
rent, if not all, then a part of the product that the money will yield
him. But the fact is that money is sterile. What is productive is labor
in the broadest sense of the word: the labor of the entrepreneur, aided
by the other factors and means of production. One of these is
circulating capital. Now it sometimes happens that there is a scarcity
of capital, so that the entrepreneur has to wait for a longer period for
the final proceeds. He could then buy, with the money obtained from the
sale of the product---a sum that he has not so far been able to
get---raw materials enabling him to produce and sell more. With more
money he could buy more machines and factors of production and expand
his business. Now he has to wait. If he can
find the money, he can have today what otherwise he must wait for until
tomorrow. Thus, when he obtains a loan, he does not hire money; *he
hires time*. The interest that he pays is the price of the advantage
that he gains in having today what otherwise he would not have until
tomorrow.

The value of a present good is always greater than that of a future
good. For this reason the most common form of commercial loan is the
*discount*. When the holder of a bill of exchange collectible in ninety
days presents it for discount at the bank, he is advanced the amount of
its face value less a deduction based on the discount rate, i.e., the
prevailing rate of interest. The businessman pays this interest if it is
worth less to him than the advantage of having immediately available the
remaining amount of the face value of the bill in order to be able to
employ the cash for the purchase of means of production. The same holds
true for whoever lends money, whether a bank or a private individual,
over the long or the short term. It is an advantage to have cash on
hand. With this money one can, at any given moment, buy something that
one wants or avail oneself of a good business opportunity that may arise
in the future; or even in normal, peaceful times one can hope that
prices may fall and one's money may be worth more. But in the meanwhile
the money is idle and produces no income. If someone offers for its use,
by way of interest, an amount that seems to the owner of the money to be
worth more than the aforementioned advantages of hoarding it, he will
put it out on loan, because he prefers the immediate gain to the future
gain. He too *discounts time*.

What, then, gives rise to the *rate of interest*, or the price of money?
Nothing more nor less than the supply of it and the demand for it.
Whoever has cash on hand demands, in exchange for the loan of it, a rate
of interest that will yield him a greater advantage than he expects to
gain by keeping the money. Whoever borrows money offers for it, by way
of interest, an amount that he finds it less burdensome to pay than to
wait until he obtains his own money. The outcome of the co-ordination of
these mutual desires is the rate of interest.

What we have just described is the mechanism
in the individual case. However, as there is not just one person who has
money and one who needs it, but many who have it and many who would like
to have it, and since nobody will lend money to anybody else at a rate
of interest lower than what a third party is prepared to pay, and vice
versa, the *market rate of interest* is determined in the same way as
all other prices on the market. This is, in any case, the essence of the
process, even though in actual practice other factors do play a role:
some psychological, like the increase in the demand for money during a
boom, when producers wish to take advantage of all possibilities and are
ready to pay a high rate of interest; others of an institutional nature,
like the intervention of the government's central bank, which
rediscounts the credit operations of private banks at a rate that to
some extent affects their own discount rate.

All this refers to money loaned on credit, i.e., money considered as an
auxiliary means of production and made available in what is
called---according to whether the loan is for a short or a long
term---the *money market* or the *capital market* (even though the two
are not strictly the same; for money on loan, in spite of running a
certain risk, does not run the specific risk of the capital of the
entrepreneur or of the stockholder: it does not share in his gains or
losses in direct proportion to the success or failure of the enterprise
in which it is invested). But the primary function of money properly so
called is to serve as a medium of exchange, and in that capacity it
gives rise to other problems, such as its national and international
*exchange rate*, its *purchasing power*, and the general influence it
exercises on the market and on business by virtue of the phenomena of
*inflation* and *deflation*. These problems have such a close bearing on
*economic*---and especially monetary---*policy* that we shall reserve
their detailed investigation for a later chapter, limiting ourselves
here to but a brief explanation.

As we have seen, it is through the medium of money that goods and
services are exchanged in the market. As the supply of commodities in
the market is limited, the quantity theory of
money is, on the whole, correct in holding
that if the quantity of money in the hands of purchasers increases or
decreases, they will be able to buy, with the same money, a lesser or a
greater quantity of goods and services. The quotient represented by the
total supply of available commodities divided by the total quantity of
available money is, other things being equal, the *purchasing power* of
the latter. An increase in the supply of money without any corresponding
increase in the supply of commodities is called *inflation*; the
contrary phenomenon is called *deflation*. Inflation occurs whenever the
exploitation of gold mines results in an increase in the quantity of
money relatively to the total supply of goods and services; and
deflation occurs whenever there is an increase in the population, and
technical progress produces an abundance of commodities without any
corresponding increase in the quantity of money in circulation.

There is a widespread belief that inflation is bad and that deflation is
good, because the former diminishes the purchasing power of the
consumers and makes foreign products more expensive, whereas deflation
has the contrary effect. However, this mode of reasoning is not correct,
because for the economy as a whole it makes no difference whether
imported or domestic products cost more if more money is available and
less if the opposite is the case. The *national economy* (if we may, for
the moment, provisionally assume its existence) neither gains nor loses
by inflation or deflation. In the long run the entire population
consumes what it produces, either directly or by way of imports
purchased with the foreign exchange made available by its exports and
with other income from abroad, as from tourism, freightage for the
cargoes transported by the national merchant marine, the proceeds from
foreign investments, etc. As long as inflation and deflation occur in
the normal course of events, their effects are produced slowly, their
extent is small in comparison with the total amount of international
trade, and the necessary adaptations can be made quite easily. But when
they are abnormally produced---that is to say, when they are produced by
the intervention of the government---they have mischievous consequences,
for they *take from some in order to give to others*.

It is to these phenomena of government
intervention that people are really referring, albeit unwittingly, when
they inveigh against the evils of inflation in particular. Our
present-day inflation is of this kind. It is produced when the
government, in need of money, has recourse to the printing press. It
costs the government no more to issue paper money than the expense of
printing it. Yet this cheap money, now at the disposal of the
government, is placed on a par with what the citizens have earned with
their own labor. The supply of available commodities, not having
increased concomitantly with the products of the government's printing
presses, now has to be divided between the old money and the new. The
whole process is very much like diluting wine with water. The government
pours water into its citizens' wine and then appropriates a share of the
watered wine for itself. With this it pays its expenses: the salaries of
more or less unnecessary bureaucrats, the cost of machinery and
materials for more or less unnecessary public works, and frequently the
costs of wars that it has not succeeded in avoiding. All these payments
are made in reality with the share of the good wine that the government
has taken from its citizens by the process of pouring water into it,
leaving each citizen with the same quantity of "wine," but of thinner
consistency, and keeping the rest for itself. The whole procedure is
hardly a whit better, morally, than clandestinely tapping an electric
cable to draw off a part of the current for oneself without having it
recorded on the meter and being obliged to pay for it. By such means
governments arbitrarily dispose of the fruits of their citizens'
laborious efforts to lay by a reserve for their old age and then
redistribute the proceeds "for the benefit of the underprivileged." In
fact, however, it is precisely the poor who are harmed the most by such
a policy, in the first place because depriving a millionaire of thirty
per cent of his possessions is not the same as taking a like amount from
a worker or an employee of modest means, and in the second place because
the upward adjustments in wages that are made in the course of an
inflation never keep pace with the rise in prices and the cost of
living. Otherwise, the government would not gain any advantage from the
inflation.

It has been said in defense of inflation that
it is beneficial to debtors because it permits them to pay off with
money of inferior quality debts contracted in terms of good money. But
the belief that all debtors are poor and all creditors are rich is a
myth. Both rich and poor are to be found in each of these classes, and,
in fact, it seems more likely that most debtors are rich, because nobody
lends money to a person who is insolvent. It is always people of
substance that are granted bank credit. On the other hand, their
creditors, at least indirectly, are the banks' shareholders and the
depositors, who are drawn from the great mass of people with small
savings.

It is also an obvious error to say that deflation (or, in this case, the
withdrawal of money from circulation by an act of government
intervention) counteracts the bad effects of inflation by causing prices
to decline. We have already stated that, for the economy as a whole,
this is of no importance. What happens in the individual case is the
following: During the course of the inflation debtors pay in bad money
the amounts they have received in good money. If new debts are then
contracted, payable in bad money, and if deflation ensues, they have to
be paid in good money. Thus, the new debtors have to pay for the sins of
the old. One injustice is heaped upon another.

For this reason some have advocated *stable money* as the ideal medium
of exchange. However, the realization of this ideal is impossible,
because, like every other commodity, *money is essentially unstable*.
Even aside from government intervention, there are many unpredictable
factors that influence its value. It is desirable, nevertheless, that
money be as stable as possible, or, at least, that its fluctuations be
kept within moderate bounds so that their repercussions may not be too
sudden or severe. But how is this to be accomplished? People talk of
keeping the money in circulation proportional to the volume or
circulation of goods. But no one has succeeded in finding the formula of
this equilibrium or the means of applying it. Such a policy requires a
constantly flexible regulatory action that cannot be effected by laws or
controlled by the power of the legislature, whose members neither have
sufficient knowledge nor are able to stay in
session day and night throughout the year.
There is no other alternative than to give plenary powers to the
executive and to charge him with the responsibility of regulating the
supply of money with the aid of his technical advisers. This is what the
executive authorities of most of the countries in the world say must be
done today, and the unhappy results of such a policy are everywhere to
be seen. It was not without reason that Lord Acton said, "All power
corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely."

This explains why people who have begun to see these matters in a clear
light have turned anew to the idea of metallic money and are asking that
gold come out of the depositories and vaults of the central banks and
return to the pockets and purses of private individuals, for gold is the
only really *sound money with intrinsic value*. The desire for a return
to gold is understandable, and we hope to see it realized some day,
although the argument in favor of the gold standard is not always stated
in a valid way. The distinctive function of gold money does not consist
in its intrinsic value or in the constancy of that value, which
fluctuates even in the absence of government intervention. The
excellence of metallic money in free circulation consists in the fact
that it renders impossible the abuse of the power of the government to
dispose of the possessions of its citizens by means of its monetary
policy and thus serves as the solid foundation of economic liberty
within each country and of free trade between one country and another.

[^fn1]:
    The reader is reminded
    that the original Spanish-language edition of this book was published in
    1956.---TRANSLATOR.
