---
layout: narrative
title: "Monopoly, Crises, and Unemployment"
author: "Faustino Ballv√©"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 9
---

*Monopoly and the French Revolution. Monopoly as a political phenomenon.
Business-cycle theories. Boom and depression. Easy money. Unemployment
in the modern world. Theories of unemployment. Keynes. Depression and
unemployment*.

The scientific study of economic phenomena began contemporaneously with
the emergence of our modern industrial economy, and the subsequent
development of economics has paralleled technological improvements in
production as well as progress in such auxiliary fields as
communications and banking. The economic theory with which we are
familiar today is no less an offspring of the Industrial Revolution than
is our actual economic system, which, rightly or wrongly, has been
dubbed *capitalism*.

Among the phenomena that economists encountered in carrying on their
investigations were monopolies, crises, and unemployment. They
consequently took it for granted that these abnormalities are inherent
characteristics of the capitalist system, or the economy of free
enterprise. It is therefore appropriate to devote some attention to the
nature of these three phenomena in order to see whether they are, in
fact, compatible with modern capitalism, and whether they are produced
by it or by other causes.

The word "monopoly" (from the Greek *monos* =
only, and *polein* = to sell) means literally "one and only seller."
Exclusive control can be exercised over a work of art, an invention, a
whole class of commodities, or the supply of labor in a particular
enterprise (as happens when labor unions bar from employment in it, by
means of a "closed shop" contract, anyone outside their own ranks). In
economics the term "monopoly" is used to denote any situation that
interferes with the free play of supply and demand. Generally, however,
what one has in mind in using the term is only a monopoly on the side of
the suppliers of commodities in the market. One speaks of a tobacco
monopoly, a match monopoly, a gasoline monopoly, a meat monopoly, etc.,
meaning that a person or a group of persons---or the government
itself---has complete control over the supply of these commodities or at
least a control sufficiently great to enable the monopolist to impose
his prices on the public and to regulate consumption accordingly,
limiting it to the quantity that he deigns to make available on the
market.

Monopoly is as old as history. Already in the most ancient communities
we find state monopolies of salt, of precious metals, of perfumes and
dyes, and even, during the decline of the Roman Empire, of articles of
prime necessity like cloth and cereals.

During the Middle Ages the guilds enjoyed a double monopoly: they
controlled production, and they monopolized the labor force in each
enterprise. The law granted the masters of the guilds the exclusive
right to carry on production, to admit or reject new members, to educate
the apprentices, and to train them to become masters. This situation
continued into the era of the absolute monarchs, although the latter
gradually arrogated to themselves many of the powers previously enjoyed
by the guilds and granted licenses for production that enabled the Crown
to bring in revenue to the state and, at the same time, to support its
favorites at court. One has only to recall the monopolies that Henry II
of France granted to his mistress, Diane de Poitiers. Indeed, a good
part of the nobility lived off the income from monopolies.

Nor was England free of them. In fact, it was on their account
that the Declaration of Independence of the
United States proclaimed the principle of freedom of labor, or the right
to the "pursuit of happiness." Similarly, on September 14, 1791, the
French Constituent Assembly, after reaffirming the Declaration of the
Rights of Man originally formulated during the period from August to
October in 1789, declared an end to "nobility, peers, distinctions among
the estates of the realm, feudal rights, hereditary judgeships, the sale
or inheritance of public offices, privileges and exemptions from the law
common to all Frenchmen, wardenships, and guilds of artisans, craftsmen,
or members of the same profession." Later it promulgated the
Constitution of 1791, of which Article 16 stated that "every citizen has
the right to enjoy in freedom his property and income and the fruit of
his labor and industry," and Article 19 granted every person freedom to
"engage in such business or to practice such profession, art, or craft
as he shall find profitable." A regime of economic liberty was
established, and monopolies were suppressed. And, to prevent these same
citizens from restricting this liberty and obstructing the free play of
supply and demand by means of combinations in restraint of trade, the
penal codes forbade and still forbid "conspiracies to effect a change in
the price of goods."[^fn1]

Monopoly, then, is not compatible with our modern economy. Indeed, it is
impossible in a system of free enterprise. To be sure, there will always
be entrepreneurs who, not content with the profits to be derived from
the supply and demand on the market, will band together (however many
"antimonopoly laws" there may be on the statute books) to monopolize
particular commodities or services in order to obtain exorbitant prices
for them. But where there is free enterprise there will not be lacking
another group of entrepreneurs, no less powerful than the first,
prepared to lure away their customers with lower prices. Free
competition will then reassert itself, and the two groups will engage in
a "price war" until the prices obtained leave only a normal profit. This
is possible, of course, only if neither of the competing groups enjoys
an official protection that the other does not have and that renders the
protected group superior to its rival in the market. This protection, in
the form of licenses authorizing the
establishment of particular industries, prohibitively high tariffs on
foreign products, tax exemptions, production or export subsidies, etc.,
may be extended in view of some well- or ill-understood national
interest, or because the country is in a state of war, or simply, as in
the days of Louis XIV, in order to grant favors to the friends (who
sometimes are also the partners) of the authorities. In all countries
there are innumerable cases of this kind in which it is not always
possible to determine whether the motive is a desire on the part of the
government to protect a more or less well-understood national interest
or to prepare for war, or whether what is involved is nothing more nor
less than official corruption. *But it is impossible to find a single
example of a monopoly that has ever existed without official
protection*.

---

The term "crisis" denotes a maladjustment in economic life that gives
rise to a general depression, but one not caused by external
circumstances like natural catastrophes, epidemics, wars, or
revolutionary inventions or discoveries. A free economy involves a
certain automatism, so that any partial disturbance of it is corrected
by the action of the forces at work. Thus, if a commodity is produced in
excess of the demand for it, its price falls, and production of it is
restricted until the demand once again increases and prices normalize
themselves. If a commodity is in short supply, its price rises and
attracts to the market new producers, who cause the price to fall to a
normal level. But there are times when this self-corrective process does
not seem to occur, and crises arise. Then economists seek an explanation
and a remedy for them. Since the time of Sismondi (1773--1842) crises
have been described as periodic infirmities to which a free economy is
subject (cyclical crises) and as a result of the "anarchy of
production." Karl Marx held both views at the same time, although it is
evident that they are mutually contradictory, since an economy in which
there are periodic phenomena that can be calculated and predicted can
hardly be characterized as anarchic.

If, as we have said, a crisis is a
maladjustment in economic life, there can be many different kinds of
crises. Generally, however, when one speaks of a crisis, what is meant
is a crisis due to a falling off of sales, a failure of the market to
absorb the products that are brought to it. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the economists of an earlier age explained this kind of
crisis by attributing it to a lack of money. Yet it is obvious that this
explanation is not satisfactory. In general, commodities are distributed
in accordance with the supply of money available. If this is meager,
commodity prices will be low, but no disturbance will be produced in the
economy. Commodities will be worth less, but money will be worth more,
and consequently everything that is brought to the market will be
absorbed. This is the way Adam Smith and Jean-Baptiste Say explain the
matter, and no one has succeeded in refuting them.

A variant of this doctrine is that of *overproduction*. It has been said
that the crisis occurs when producers produce beyond the needs of the
consumers, so that there is a glut on the market; for the consumers,
even though they have the money to buy the commodities offered for sale,
simply do not want them. In reply to this contention one need only
observe that, up to the present day, there has never been a time when
the world has produced enough for everybody. The great economic problem
is that of scarcity, which still continues to exist to a frightful
extent. Mankind still does not produce enough to provide for even the
most pressing necessities. A general overproduction of commodities is a
myth, and not an actual fact. At any given time and place there may be a
surplus of particular goods, but not of all goods. In such cases the
mechanism we have already described comes into play, and normal
conditions are restored without any important disturbances in the
economy, even though the readjustment may ruin particular producers who
have erred in calculating their production or in forecasting market
conditions. This is a case of *uneven production*, which a third theory
of the crisis considers as its explanation. But the core of truth in
this doctrine---i.e., the occurrence of such local and temporary
surpluses in the production of particular
commodities---does not explain the crisis as a phenomenon of general
economic disturbance.

Rodbertus, Marx, Henry George, and economists of their persuasion, as
well as some more recent authors who consider themselves liberals, like
Carlos P. Carranza,[^fn2]
explain the crisis as a result of the *concentration of capital*.
According to them (in spite of some minor variations in their
doctrines), the producers accumulate and employ in increasing production
the *ground rent* and the *surplus value* that they withhold from
society or from the worker, thereby reducing the purchasing power of the
masses. At the moment when this money is reinvested in the construction
of new units of production (factories, workshops, granaries, etc.),
wages are distributed to many workers, and there is a *boom* in the
market as more money flows into it although the supply of goods has not
yet increased, since the new units in the process of construction are
still not producing. By the time they finally do so, there is an
abundance of commodities on the market that cannot be absorbed, and a
crisis ensues. This explanation is also mythical and erroneous, because
it never happens that all producers reap profits, save, and invest at
the same time. Even if this were true of each one of them, there would
still be lacking the necessary synchronization that would alone explain
the general crisis.

Approaching the problem of crises from another point of view, the
*currency school*, which appeared in England in the second half of the
nineteenth century, and the *Viennese school* conceive of the cause in
monetary terms. As we have already observed, money, although essentially
a medium of exchange, has other functions and effects that give it a
life of its own. Any abnormalities arising---or rather, induced---in the
value of money convert it from a regulator into a disturber of economic
life. In a word, *crises arise, not from a lack, but from an excess, of
money*.

This does not mean that crises are caused by inflation. As we have seen,
inflation, when it takes place in the natural course of events, does not
disturb the equilibrium of the market. What is
economically detrimental is the discrimination that results from an
inflationary policy on the part of the government. A distinction
therefore has to be made between inflation per se and *credit
expansion*, otherwise known as an *easy-money* (or *cheap-money*)
policy. Inflation takes place in the natural course of events whenever
the supply of money on the market increases more than that of goods.
This occurred in Europe when gold was shipped there from the Indies, and
in the world in general during the period of the "gold fever" that
accompanied the discoveries of new deposits of ore in the United States
and South Africa. But when governments resort to the printing press to
produce the currency needed to pay for the services and materials of a
swelling bureaucracy and more or less spectacular programs of public
works, what occurs is both an *inflation*, because more money enters the
market without a corresponding increase in the supply of goods, and, at
the same time, an *expansion of credit*, because the public works
stimulate the development and growth, above and beyond the normal needs
of the country, of industries engaged in carrying out the government
program and unable to subsist without it.

*Credit expansion* pure and simple takes places when, in an effort to
force an increase in the country's production beyond the normal
development of its economic life, a policy is adopted---by the
government, of course---of accelerating production, or, as W. A.
Lewis[^fn3] calls it,
mobilizing resources. This policy consists simply in making money
available (generally in the form of bank credit at low interest rates)
to those who wish to establish or expand branches of production that are
considered advantageous to the country. A boom supervenes: factories or
farmhouses are built; machinery is manufactured, imported, and set up; a
bureaucratic personnel is organized. All this means money passing
through many hands and reaching the market to buy consumers' goods that
have not increased to the same extent. The result is that, in accordance
with the law of supply and demand, and in spite of the price ceilings
imposed by the government, prices rise. With the increase in prices,
wages too have to be raised, and there is an illusion of prosperity. But
a time comes when the money available for the
expansion of production is used up, and the industries thus created have
to live on their own resources. Very few can do so. Some industries
prove to have been poor investments and go out of business entirely.
Others produce goods for which there is no demand, like machinery for
still other industries that have not expanded or consumers' goods that
are priced too high to compete with those already on the domestic or
foreign market. A crisis results: prices have risen, the value of the
monetary unit has depreciated, production useful and necessary to the
country has not increased, sales fall off, workers lose their jobs,
unemployment is on the rise, and a painful period of readjustment
begins. The policy of credit expansion, instead of increasing the wealth
of the country, has dissipated a good part of it. One is reminded of the
old story of the milkmaid and the pitcher of milk. With the proceeds
from the sale of the milk she dreams of buying some sheep; from the
sheep she hopes to get enough to purchase a cow; etc., etc. But in the
midst of her daydreams the milkmaid stumbles, the pitcher is shattered,
and nothing remains but her tears. If one tries to build on illusions,
one is sure to suffer disillusionment sooner or later.

We have seen, then, that crises, like monopolies, do not and cannot have
any place in an economy of free enterprise. They are not essential
elements or necessary effects of it; neither are they defects in it.
They are, on the contrary, the *consequences of political interference
with the free-market economy*.

---

As we shall see, the same holds true for unemployment.

As long as methods of production remained primitive, unemployment was
unknown. The wretched poverty that prevailed before the Industrial
Revolution was due precisely to the meager productivity of the methods
then in use and to the lack of the manpower needed to produce enough to
satisfy the necessities of everyone. The introduction of machinery,
above all in the English textile and weaving industry, left large
numbers of workers jobless. Much more yarn and many more fabrics were
produced with one machine and a couple of workers than with
many hand looms and large numbers of weavers.
This gave rise to several grievous incidents in the textile centers of
Europe---notably in Lancashire, England, and the areas of Lyon, the
Franco-Belgian frontier, and Catalonia. The workers displaced by the
machine rioted and burned---or tried to burn---the factories. But they
soon came to realize that mechanization reduced the price of the product
and left the consumers with money to buy other commodities that formerly
had not been within their reach. Producers expanded their enterprises
and hired the hands left idle by the introduction of machinery into the
textile industry. On the other hand, mechanization in general created in
turn a vast industry devoted to the manufacture of machinery that
likewise more than absorbed those unable to find work in the factories.

Between 1848 and 1914, unemployment as a mass phenomenon disturbing the
whole economy was unknown. Some industries declined, others prospered,
and the workers who were discharged from the former found employment in
the latter. Besides, as there was at that time complete freedom of
migration and of labor throughout the world, those who were not
satisfied with the conditions of employment in one country emigrated to
wherever wages were higher, and thus a relative prosperity was in the
process of being generally diffused.

With the advent of the First World War, conscription and the demands of
war production (arms, munitions, clothing, and food---in Germany, for
example, eighty per cent of all the production of food and clothing was
for the army) resulted in a great scarcity of labor. Taking advantage of
this situation, the trade-unions succeeded in forcing wages upward. When
the war came to an end, the labor force increased enormously, for the
returning soldiers were added to those who had taken their places during
the hostilities and had flocked to the factories from the country or
from domestic life (women especially), without any corresponding
increase in the demand for goods, since every member of the actively
employed working population produces for several members of the general
population.

But three other factors played a role in this situation. A great
part of the labor force created during the war
was fitted to work only in war industries, and these had shut down. On
the other hand, wages had gone up, while the normalization of production
was causing prices to fall, so that these wages now exceeded the value
of what the workers were producing. Industrial equipment had been used
up, and there was no capital available to replace it, much less to add
to it to give work to the unemployed. After all, the war had been
immensely destructive. It had impoverished the world, and there was no
other recourse but for everyone to restrict his consumption. For the
worker this retrenchment had to consist in contenting himself with a
lower wage rate, so that the product of his labor could be offered for
sale at prices obtainable in an impoverished market.

But this was contrary to the policy of the trade-unions, and the
governments found themselves obliged to resort to unemployment benefits
to take care of those who had been thrown out of work. As they lacked
the money for this, they had to fabricate or create it: the printing
presses were set rolling, and there was money for everybody, but
devalued money, because prices rose as fast as the supply of money
increased. Those workers who were unwilling to accept a direct cut in
their wages had them reduced indirectly in the form of monetary
devaluation; but, in addition, the unemployed, who could have increased
production by accepting lower wages, did not do so and thereby retarded
the return to normalcy. Something similar happened after the Second
World War. In England, for example, the Labor Government had to devalue
the pound sterling, because high wages raised production costs to the
point where it became difficult to export.

From what has been said here, it follows that unemployment is not an
essential element of what has been improperly called the capitalistic
economy. On the contrary: the natural tendency of such an economic
system is toward an increase in production and, concomitantly, in jobs.
When a new machine produces more goods with less labor, this does not
mean that the supernumerary workers are left idle, for they either
remain in the same industry tending new machines or transfer to another
in greater need of their labor. The characteristic feature of an economy
of free enterprise is that it provides work
for everybody who wants it and an ever increasing supply of goods and
services. But in order for this to occur, it is necessary that there be
no interference with production on the part of either pressure groups or
the state. If pressure groups exact wages that render production no
longer profitable, or if the state imposes on profits taxes that make it
impossible for enterprises to maintain or increase their productive
equipment, then a brake is put on production, and job opportunities are
correspondingly contracted.

Thus, both the theory of so-called "institutional unemployment" and the
theory of the "industrial reserve army" of Marx and Engels are quite
untenable. According to the first, capitalism always involves periods of
general unemployment, and, according to the second theory, unemployment
is chronic. Both theories, as we have seen, contradict the facts and the
very essence of an economy of free enterprise. There is no unemployment
in normal times, much less during a period of prosperity. *There is
unemployment when there is a crisis*, i.e., when the action of pressure
groups renders production unprofitable by raising costs above market
prices. There is also unemployment when the fiscal policies of the
government prevent the increase in the accumulation of capital goods
from keeping pace with and, if possible, surpassing the increase in the
population and thereby raising the general standard of living. Another
cause of unemployment is nationalism and its corollary, economic
protectionism and migration barriers, which place difficulties in the
way of the normal world-wide distribution of goods and services.

Even less tenable is the doctrine given currency a few years before the
Second World War by the English economist John Maynard Keynes (later
Lord Keynes). Paradoxically, this doctrine attained its greatest
popularity precisely at the time when, according to the reports of his
intimate friends, Lord Keynes himself was beginning to recognize its
falsity, and when he was on the point of making a public declaration to
that effect; in any case, he died without having done so. According to
this doctrine, unemployment is due to saving and is to be combatted by
resorting to every means to force those who have money to spend
it---as if bringing money to the market had
the magic power of raising up new plants and factories. In reality, the
only effect of such a policy is to increase the price of goods and, by
the same token, to reduce the general standard of living. Where money is
really needed is in *production* for the purchase of more machinery and
equipment, the employment of more workers, and the manufacture of more
goods for the market with the object of lowering the cost of living. And
this is precisely what saving does. He who saves money does not keep it
under a mattress, as people did in the mercantilist era, but *invests*
it to produce a profit or to yield interest. Either he puts it into real
property or into mortgages, and thereby favors the expansion of housing
and the employment of construction workers; or he invests it in equities
and buys shares of productive enterprises, which are also thus enabled
to expand; or he lends it at interest to entrepreneurs, with the same
result for the general well-being. Saving and capital accumulation,
then, are the great factors making for an increase in production and a
consequent abundance of jobs and a lowering of prices. The liquidation
of savings, the spending of money in the market in order to acquire
consumption goods, has the opposite effect: the stagnation of
production, a rise in prices, a diminution in the purchasing power of
the general public, a slump, and, consequently, mass unemployment. The
Keynesian formula, therefore, leads to results that are exactly contrary
to those it is aimed at attaining.

[^fn1]:
    Spanish Penal Code of
    1870, Article 555. For recent reforms of a similar nature in Mexico, see
    Article 253 of the Penal Code of the Federal District and Territories.
    Similar provisions may be found in the French Penal Code, Article 419.

[^fn2]:
    *Vieja y nueva econom√≠a
    pol√≠tica* (Buenos Aires, 1954).

[^fn3]:
    William Arthur Lewis,
    *The Principles of Economic Planning* (London: George Allen & Unwin,
    Ltd., 1949).
