---
layout: narrative
title: "Preface to the Spanish-Language Edition"
author: "Gustavo R. Velasco"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 3
---

Here is a book that answers an essential need. Simple, clear, and
intelligible, it is a book that had to be written, and, now that it has
been written, it deserves to be and will be read.

Nowadays especially, when many works on economics read like treatises on
hydraulics, and when not a few economists seem to take an actual pride
in the obscurity of their language, it has really become necessary that
someone return to the traditional conception of it as something more
than a technique for specialists, as a subject concerned with an aspect
of experience that ought to be treated as an integral part of our lives
and hence as one in need of being understood again, if not by everyone,
then at least by the educated and by the intellectual leaders of
society.

Of the importance, nay more, of the urgency of this task, there can be
no doubt. It has already become platitudinous to observe that the great
questions of our time are economic in character or at least are
connected with or founded upon economics. Whereas in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries it was religious controversies, and in the
nineteenth century political reforms, that occupied the center of the
scene, today it is the economic problems that appear as vital and
decisive; and even the churches devote a good part of their time and
effort to social and economic preachments, sometimes, one fancies, to
the extent of neglecting their spiritual mission and affairs of a more
exalted nature. To be sure, the question that I regard as the central
issue of our age, viz., the choice that confronts our generation between
a free or voluntary society and a servile or totalitarian society, does
transcend the purely economic plane and involves broader problems,
political and social, and even questions of mental health and personal
morality. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that essential to the
resolution of the central issue is an economic element, and that only
economic theory can enable us to come to a reasoned and well-founded
decision either in favor of the market economy or in favor of the
controlled or mandated economy.

For economic theory teaches us, in effect, what will happen under
different sets of circumstances. In clarifying for us what is
presupposed by the diverse ends that we can pursue and what consequences
must follow from our aiming at them, economic analysis makes it possible
for us to choose our goals with full insight into what it is that we
really want and hence to aim at ends that are mutually consistent and
compatible. It is therefore no exaggeration to qualify it as a technique
of rational action and to assert that without its help it is impossible
to make a defensible choice among the different possible systems of the
economic organization of society.

It may well be, as Röpke observes, that the study of economics has
become essential for our entire civilization because its preservation
requires that those in positions of responsibility understand at least
the operation of the economic system that forms part of it. And yet even
a cursory glance at the instruction given in this discipline suffices to
show how far we still are from having answered the need of providing
modern man with a clear and comprehensive conception of the structure
and operation of society and of the place he occupies in it. The
economic ideas imparted in the courses in civics given in our secondary
schools are as incomplete as they are superficial, and at the
undergraduate level, where there would be greater opportunity for a
presentation of this science that would make of it a living part of the
culture of our time, as Ortega y Gasset has advocated, it is not even
studied.

As a result, the average person, including those who by virtue of their
position are called upon to play a leading role in society, lacks any
economic education or considers economics a futile or incomprehensible
kind of erudition. One of the most pernicious consequences of this
ignorance and of the resulting refusal to reflect seriously on economic
problems is the tendency on the part of the majority of citizens to
favor eclectic compromises as solutions. They are the more inclined to
do so as, in their blindness to economic reality, they fail to perceive
that all of us have a stake in these problems and that our welfare and
even our freedom and our lives depend on the way in which they are
resolved. This attitude on the part of the public is responsible for the
fact that day by day, slowly but surely, we find ourselves sliding down
the slope of interventionism. Yet it is known that such a policy does
not and cannot constitute a third or "middle" way between capitalism and
collectivism and must lead inevitably to communism and totalitarianism,
unless one of the great crises that it periodically provokes endows its
victims with the necessary lucidity to decide to abandon it and climb
back up the slope.

As can be seen from these very brief considerations, it is not possible
to escape from economics. If it is indeed concerned with the fundamental
problems of society, we shall have to pay heed to it whether we like it
or not. The fact is that all the theories that are applied to the
solution of these problems, including those that are mistaken because
they do not correspond to the present state of that science or to the
actual conditions that they profess to enable us to control, are
economic theories. Neither is it possible to think of leaving this part
of our lives to the economists, not only because, adapting a phrase of
Clemenceau's, we could say that economics is too serious a matter to be
left to the professionals, but also because such an abdication on our
part would make democracy impossible. It is all very well always to
listen to the opinions of the experts and to place in their hands part
of the responsibility for the execution of the policies they recommend;
nevertheless, the fundamental decisions, those involving matters of
basic principle, should be made by all qualified citizens, by all the
intellectual leaders of the community.

The end to be attained by the diffusion of economic education may be
inferred from the foregoing remarks. As Mises says, it is not a question
of turning every citizen into an economist; it is simply a matter of
preparing him to perform his civic duty so that he can come to an
informed and judicious decision concerning the discussions and proposals
with which we find ourselves daily confronted at the present time.
Knight correctly observes that what is most depressing about the policy
of price control, as applied, for example, to the freezing of rents, is
not the fact that the tenants possess a greater number of votes than the
landlords, but the state of mind and the benighted reasoning it reveals.

This book of Dr. Faustino Ballvé is small in size, but it constitutes an
excellent first step, in the Spanish language, in the direction
indicated in the preceding lines. Indeed, even in other languages,
elementary introductions to economics or works in which it is explained
with the educational purpose I have mentioned are exceedingly rare. To
write them requires not only a broad background of knowledge, but
perspective; not only a complete mastery of the material, but the
ability to simplify and a kind of talent that is by no means common.
Perhaps the reason why Professor Ballvé has so well fulfilled the task
he set himself is that, besides having studied economics in the lecture
hall and the library, he has had the opportunity of applying it and of
seeing its results as a civic leader and a holder of public office, and
that to his studies in economics he adds a knowledge of the law and a
career as a member of the bar. In any case, all of us who think that
there is no more vital job at present than that of defending freedom,
which is one and indivisible, and for that reason quite inconceivable
and impossible in the absence of economic freedom, owe a debt of
gratitude to him for this book.

Gustavo R. Velasco
