---
layout: narrative
title: "The Market"
author: "Faustino Ballv√©"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 5
---

*The autistic and the co-operative economy. The division of labor,
exchange, and the market. Commerce and trade. The sovereignty of the
consumer. Monopoly, economic dictatorship, and the black market*.

Man is incapable of satisfying all his wants by his own unaided efforts.
Individual autarky, i.e., a completely autistic, self-sufficient
economy, is impossible. It is a kind of economy that is encountered only
in utopias like that of Robinson Crusoe, but never in the actual life of
man.

Men need to have recourse to other men to obtain the goods and services
they lack, in exchange for other goods and services that they can offer.

Hence resulted the household economy of the individual family, in which
the man hunted or fished and at the same time protected the members of
his family against danger. They, *in exchange*, took care of hearth and
home, prepared the meals, gathered the wild fruits they found growing in
the forests, and fashioned primitive garments. Each individual exchanged
goods and services with another.

The basis of the *co-operative economy* thereby achieved was the
*division of labor*.

There are some who think this a modern innovation. But it is not. It has
always been a constant feature of economic activity.

Professor von Mises rightly says in his book
*Human Action*: "The exchange relation is the fundamental social
relation."[^fn1]

The exchange relation---or, more simply, in economic terms,
*exchange*---takes place in the *market*. The family that has eggs to
spare exchanges them for meat with another family that needs eggs and
has an excess of meat. But this is not enough. Sometimes a family that
has eggs and needs meat finds that its neighbor has only fish to spare,
which can then be exchanged for meat.

These relations gradually grow more complicated, and it becomes more
convenient to go to a public market place to offer for sale whatever one
has in superfluity in exchange for what one lacks, whether by direct
barter or in an indirect way.

The exchange of commodities was facilitated with the invention of
*money*. At first this appeared in a primitive form, until it developed
into the coined money that we all know and use. Then goods and services
were exchanged for money, or vice versa.

Exchange or *commerce* ceased to be local and spread between one town
and another until it became international.

Everything mentioned so far, from the exchange of meat for eggs between
neighboring families to international trade, constitutes the *market*,
the pivot around which all of economic life revolves. The market is the
foundation of every economy.

In the market things are exchanged against things or against services,
services against services, or services or things against money. Whatever
is susceptible of exchange in the market constitutes a *commodity*.

From the strictly economic point of view, anything and everything that
is exchanged must be classified as a commodity. Whoever goes to the
market is in quest of an exchange that will satisfy a want, that is to
say, something that will serve to render his life more agreeable. Hence,
instead of the word
"merchandise,"[^fn2] English
usage prefers the word
"commodity"[^fn3] in this
context to refer to whatever is susceptible of
exchange, whether goods or services. A thing has *value* when it is a
commodity and is capable of being exchanged in the market.

*Value* always expresses a judgment of the estimation in which something
is held, because a thing has a value if and only in so far as it is
wanted or desired. For example, a millionaire can buy a diamond for a
hundred thousand dollars and find himself dying of thirst in the desert
and unable to obtain even a glass of water in exchange for his diamond,
which there lacks all value.

It is said, especially by the mathematical economists, that the value of
a thing increases as it becomes scarcer. But this is by no means
certain, for it can happen that a thing may become scarcer every day and
yet have no value at all because nobody wants it. Horse-drawn carriages
have become very scarce nowadays, and yet nobody wants them. They have
no value at all, or hardly any. Nonetheless, only those things are
*economic goods* that we lack and long to have, not *free goods* that
are in the reach of all, like the air that we breathe.

The distinction between *value in use* and *value in exchange* was first
made by Aristotle, was adopted by the canonists, and was later developed
by the classical economists. *Value in use* is the utility that a thing
has *in itself. Value in exchange* is what it will fetch in the market.
It has been contended, as the canonists did in an earlier day, that it
is morally wrong to take advantage of a thing's scarcity in order to
obtain more in exchange for it than its value in use.

However, this distinction is untenable. For even though it is true that
an automobile generally has more value than a needle, it is altogether
possible that in a concrete case (depending on time and circumstances)
the contrary could occur. A tailor who is in want of a needle cannot sew
with an automobile, and in places where gasoline is not to be had,
automobiles have no value at all. Besides, how many needles is an
automobile worth? It is difficult---or rather, impossible---to say
definitely, because the utility of each varies according to time and
place, and, in the last analysis, only the prices quoted in the market
tell us the relation of the *value in
exchange* between two commodities. Therefore, it is not possible to
establish a quantitative relation of values according to the *value in
use* of the automobile and of the needle. All that is possible is a
qualitative estimation of a general character, because an automobile is
generally considered more valuable than a needle, but this need not
always be the case, nor does this difference in value admit of being
expressed in quantitative terms.

For that matter, a thing's *value in use* is not constant either,
because some new invention or discovery, or simply a change in
prevailing tastes, can diminish it or even wipe it out entirely. Our
mothers kept in their wardrobes dresses and hats that in their day had a
considerable value in use and today have none at all. On the other hand,
the hats and dresses of the present, far more simple, but more in
fashion, do have value.

Penicillin reduced the value in use of many medicines, but others, like
streptomycin, terramycin, and chloromycin, have diminished the value in
use of penicillin. For these reasons the concept of value in use, even
though it has some basis in fact, serves no purpose in economics.

An attempt has also been made to find in *labor* a measure of the
*value* of things. This results from insistence on determining the
"just" value of things, thereby confounding an economic question with a
moral question that has nothing to do with it. The attempt has been made
in two ways. In the early days of classical economics it was said that
since things are the fruits of human labor expended in the utilization
or transformation of natural resources, their value ought to be measured
in terms of the labor involved in their production. From this the
socialists derived their demand that the workers receive the *whole
proceeds of their labor*, from which, it was charged, the capitalists
retain a *surplus value* consisting of that part of the proceeds of
labor which is not indispensable for the bare subsistence of the
laborer.

The classical economists were not long in observing that, in the first
place, the difficulty of the calculation made it practically
impossible to take the labor involved in
production as the measure of the value of the product, and, besides, the
labor required for the production of a thing varies according to place
and time, depending on the skill of the managers and workers at a given
moment and on the extent to which techniques and means of production are
perfected during the course of the years. Hence, they proposed measuring
the value of things, not by the labor that they *cost the producer*, but
by the labor they *saved the purchaser*. But this criterion, too, proved
impracticable because of the difficulty of determining how much labor
the purchase of a thing actually saved the buyer in general. The
purchase of a delivery wagon will effect a definite saving for a
confectionery store and a different amount for a hosiery factory or a
radio store. Should each one of them, then, pay a different price?

Must we therefore revert, for our criterion of value, not to the labor
saved the purchaser, but to the labor involved in production? Or, to
avoid these problems, is the value of each thing to be fixed by the
average amount of labor that it presumably cost its various producers?
But on what are we to base this average cost? And who is to fix it? The
government? Is the price we are to pay for things to be set by the
arbitrary decree of the governmental authorities, when they have no more
basis than anyone else for arriving at an objective valuation? This is
precisely what is done in Russia today, and the result is that when the
government sets on any commodity a price that is cheap in the estimation
of the consumers, the latter hasten to purchase it until the existing
supply is exhausted, and then the government is obliged to raise the
price. Contrariwise, when the price that the government sets for a
commodity seems dear to the consumer, he abstains from purchasing it,
and the commodity remains indefinitely on the shelves as an unsold item
of inventory, immobilizing capital and running the risk of
deteriorating. Then the government, to extricate itself, is obliged to
lower the price. In other words, *supply and demand* come into play even
in a nationalized economy.

Supply and demand constitute the mechanism of the market
that determines *prices*, which are the value
of goods and services expressed in terms of another, neutral commodity,
viz., *money*. These prices are formed by *competition* in the market,
not only among those who offer to sell goods and services, but also
among those seeking to buy them. When a commodity is in abundant supply
and is difficult to sell, the vendors, to avoid immobilizing the capital
it represents and running the risk of its depreciation through spoilage
or a change in the tastes of the consumers, lower prices and compete
with one another to make a sale. When, on the contrary, an article is
scarce and is in public demand, people are prepared to pay higher prices
in order to obtain it, and competition arises among those seeking to
purchase it. However, the latter case is rather rare. Generally it is
the sellers who compete and lower their prices in order to satisfy the
buyers.

Hence it has been said that free trade or the free market means *the
sovereignty of the consumer*. And so effective, so necessary, so
ineluctable is this sovereignty that, as we have just had occasion to
observe, not even the communist economy can suppress it completely. And
as the consumer is the public in general, without distinction of rank or
fortune, the free market is the most obvious expression of the
sovereignty of the people and the best guarantee of democracy.
Individual guarantees stated in writing in the constitution are of no
use to a nation if it is not the people, but a third party, whether
government or trade-union, that fixes prices and wages and determines
what is to be produced and what is to be sold; for in that case the
people, in being deprived of their *right of free choice* in the market,
i.e., their right to assign everything the rank and the value it suits
them to give it, from being sovereign are reduced to the status of
slaves. Control of the market by the governmental authorities is the
instrument of the modern dictatorships, much less cruel in appearance,
much less spectacular, but far more effective than the police and resort
to naked force.

In clarification of the foregoing, we can conclude with the following
remarks:

1.¬†¬†*Nothing has value in itself*. The consumer confers value
on it by seeking to acquire it. Hence, the
value of a thing is never objective, but always subjective.

2.¬†¬†The monetary *price* of a thing is not the *measure* of its value,
but only an expression of it. To say that a cow is worth two hundred
dollars is nothing else than to say that it is worth twenty ewes or a
sewing machine.

3.¬†¬†It is an error to believe that he who buys a thing wishes to give
for it an *equivalent* value or that he who pays two hundred dollars for
a cow thinks that a cow has the same value as two hundred dollars, or
vice versa. In the market the buyer as well as the seller *gives less
than he gets*. Whoever pays two hundred dollars for a cow does so
because for him the cow that he gets is worth more than the sum that he
gives for it, and whoever sells a cow for two hundred dollars does so
because for him that sum is worth more than the cow. If this were not
so, no exchange would take place: each one of them would keep what he
already has.

4.¬†¬†*The sovereignty of the consumer does not mean the tyranny of the
consumer*. The resistance of the latter, aided by the competition among
the sellers, succeeds in keeping prices at a low level that nevertheless
allows a margin for the subsistence of those who have participated in
the production of the merchandise and its transportation to the market,
such as the entrepreneur, the capitalist, the technicians, the workers,
and the merchants. If, in spite of this, the consumer still continues to
hold back, then prices do not fall any further, because nobody wants to
make a gift of his possessions or his labor; what happens is that the
merchandise in question ceases to be produced and sold and disappears
from the market. But if it is a commodity that the consumer considers
useful, he will give up his resistance and relax his pressure on the
producer.

5.¬†¬†Neither does the free market involve the *dictatorship of the
producer* or of the merchant. For if the producer or the tradesman
dealing in a particular commodity, or all the producers joined together,
demand in the market excessive prices because they are the only ones who
have such merchandise (i.e., if they
constitute a monopoly), then not only does the
consumer abstain from buying and forgo that commodity, replacing it with
some substitute ("Better some of a pudding than none of a
pie"),[^fn4] but other, less
avaricious suppliers and businessmen produce it and offer it for sale at
a lower price. Thus, the price level is necessarily one that both buyer
and seller find equally tolerable.

6.¬†¬†*Economic dictatorship* arises when production and trade are
withdrawn from the mechanism of the market by the action of the
governmental authorities. Then neither the consumer nor the seller is
sovereign, but only the dictatorship of the bureaucracy over both, even
though this is not one hundred per cent effective, as we have already
seen in the case of Russia. The market continues to function,
nonetheless, albeit in clandestine form (the black market); but in any
case, economic dictatorship deprives the people of their liberty and
well-being.

[^fn1]:
    *Op. cit*., p. 195

[^fn2]:
    In Spanish, *mercanc√≠a*
    or *mercader√≠a*, related etymologically to the word for "market"
    (*mercado*), as the English word "merchandise" is related to the French
    word for "market" (*march√©*).---TRANSLATOR.

[^fn3]:
    *Comodidad* in
    Spanish means "comfort," "utility," "convenience,"
    "advantage."---TRANSLATOR.

[^fn4]:
    The sense of the
    Spanish proverb here cited by the author is rendered with perhaps
    greater literalness by its Scottish equivalent: "Bannocks are better nor
    nae kind o' bread."---TRANSLATOR.
