---
layout: narrative
title: "The Role of the Entrepreneur"
author: "Faustino Ballvé"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 6
---

*Entrepreneur and consumer. Economic calculation. The data of the
market. Factors and means of production. Comparative cost. Marginal
utility. Diminishing returns. The time factor. Risk*.

We have seen that the market is the pivot around which the whole of
economic life revolves. We can say just as well that the market revolves
around the entrepreneur.

The *entrepreneur* is the person, natural or juristic (i.e., individual
or collective), who enters the market with the object of making a
profit, that is to say, of getting more than he gives. In this sense,
all those who go to the market are entrepreneurs, buyers as well as
sellers, since anyone who buys a cow for two hundred dollars does so
because he considers that, for him, the cow is worth more than the money
he pays for it. Otherwise he would keep his two hundred dollars.
However, in economics one who enters the market in order to obtain what
he needs for his own use is not called an entrepreneur, but a
*consumer*. Strictly speaking, the entrepreneur is anyone who goes to
the market to sell or anyone who goes to the market to buy, not for his
own consumption, but to resell what he has bought.

The entrepreneur aims at making a profit, and to this end he is obliged
to resort to appropriate means. He thus has to exercise his power of
choice twice: he has to choose the end, and he has to choose the means
of attaining it. For both he has to make use
of his judgment, of his own powers of reasoning. This is called
*economic calculation*.

The first thing that must be done by whoever considers himself an
entrepreneur and desires to enter the market to offer for sale something
that will yield him a profit is to decide on the kind of thing he is
going to trade in. It may be something entirely produced by him, or
something he has transformed from what it was when he acquired it; or it
may simply be in the same physical condition as it was when he got it,
but improved in his estimation by his having kept it until the consumer
needed it or by his having transported it from where it was not useful
to where it is; or perhaps he has just broken it up or accumulated it in
quantities acceptable to the consumer. To come to such a decision, he
must study the market, that is to say, he will have to be guided by what
in economics are called *the data of the market*. He has to take into
account what is already in abundant supply in the market and what
therefore it is not advisable to offer for sale; what is in short supply
and consequently will easily find ready purchasers; what the qualities
are that are predominantly in demand; whether it is expedient to offer
one quality or another; and finally, what the future *prospects* of the
market are, i.e., what promises to prove profitable, not now, but when
he enters the market and even after that. This applies as much to goods
as to services: nobody will undertake today to sell things that are out
of fashion, nor will anybody offer the services of an ostler on a modern
automobile highway. It is rather to be supposed that at the present
moment some entrepreneur is calmly preparing to enter a business
connected with the peaceful uses of atomic energy.

Having chosen the end, i.e., the kind of speculation he is going to
embark on, the entrepreneur has next to concern himself with the means
by which he is to carry out his project. These are called, in general,
*means of production*, even though they may not involve the production
of material things, but simply the rendering of services. A producer is
not only one who makes shoes; he is also one who distributes them, one
who transports them. All produce, in the last analysis, *commodities*;
that is to say, they accommodate the consumer
by satisfying his needs and desires.

These means of production can be divided into two categories: the
*factors of production* and the *techniques of production*.

The factors of production are essentially *capital* and *labor*. The
former is divided into fixed and circulating capital. *Fixed capital*
consists of land, buildings, machinery, tools, means of transport, and
other permanent factors needed to produce the goods and services that
the entrepreneur will offer for sale in the market. For a textile
factory, these would be the looms and other machines needed in the
various stages of preparing the yarn, processing it, and producing the
finished cloth. For a distributor, they would include warehouses for
storing the merchandise, as well as scales for weighing it, packing
materials, and other apparatus to enable him to distribute his wares. An
enterprise engaged in journalism must invest in facilities for gathering
the news, whether by cable or wireless, as well as typewriters,
duplicating machines of all kinds, etc., in its various branch offices;
and the fixed capital of the agriculturist consists of the soil, grist
mills, olive presses, tractors, and ploughs.

*Circulating* capital is the money needed for the purchase of the raw
materials, lubricants, composts, seeds, wages and salaries, rent, light,
etc., that enable the entrepreneur to go on producing and to keep his
business in operation. As part of the costs of production, this is a
factor that enters into the sales price of the product.

*Labor* consists in the services of all those engaged in the enterprise,
beginning with the entrepreneur himself---who, with the factors already
mentioned, arranges for the production of the goods or services that are
to be offered for sale in the market---from the highest ranks of
intellectual workers down to the humblest hired hands.

Besides the material means or factors of production, the entrepreneur
has to provide himself with *technical* means, choosing those that he
considers to be the most adequate. There are diverse methods of
producing textiles, iron or steel, chemical or
pharmaceutical products, etc. Each has its advantages and its
disadvantages, and he has to select the one that is most appropriate for
his purpose, taking into account the wants he wishes to satisfy, the
processes used by his competitors, the costs involved in the use of each
method, and the corresponding profit to be expected from its employment,
etc., etc. In certain cases the entrepreneur may himself be the inventor
of a technical process for which he obtained a *patent*, or he may have
obtained from another inventor such a patent or a trade-mark or a design
or an industrial model of an earlier producer or of a foreign producer
who has granted him, for a period of time, an *exclusive* license to
produce or to distribute the commodity in question.

But this is not all. Among the technical problems that the entrepreneur
has to resolve are the provision of raw materials and the system of
production, i.e., whether to undertake the complete process of turning
the raw material into the finished product or to begin with
half-finished goods, whether to hire labor at a fixed wage or to pay on
a piecework basis, etc. Also very important are the extent of the
enterprise and of the means that the entrepreneur has at his disposal,
the prospects of the market, and, above all, the net *return* yielded by
his industrial unit. All of this calculation he will do in the light of
his own knowledge or that of people paid by him to provide expert
mechanical, chemical, technical, industrial, or commercial information,
and also on the basis of the teachings of economic experience that are
comprehended under the rubric of *economic geography, economic history*,
and *statistics*.

---

Within this body of knowledge needed by the entrepreneur in order to
exercise his power of choice in launching and managing his enterprise
are included what are commonly called economic laws. Among the latter
should be mentioned chiefly *the law of comparative cost, the law of
marginal utility*, and *the law of diminishing returns*.

According to *the law of comparative cost*, more recently known as the
law of association, as formulated by the classical economist David
Ricardo, in view of the greater or lesser extent of industrial
progress of different countries, if, for
example, producer A needs three hours to produce commodity *X* and two
hours to produce commodity *Y*, while producer B (in a country in a less
advanced state of industrial development) needs five and four hours
respectively, it is advantageous for all concerned for A to produce only
commodity *Y* and for B to produce only commodity *X*; for in that case
each of them will produce a greater quantity in the same number of
hours, and the two together will produce more of both commodities than
if each had undertaken to produce them both. This is the so-called law
of association or law of comparative cost, a corollary of the law of the
division of labor. It constitutes one of the most powerful arguments
against the policy of economic nationalism and autarky. At the same
time, it serves as a guide to the entrepreneur in his attempt to obtain
from his efforts and his venture the greatest possible profit and,
concomitantly, to increase the supply in the market for the benefit of
the consumer.

The *law of marginal utility* was formulated almost simultaneously by
three economists of the last third of the nineteenth century: Carl
Menger, Stanley Jevons, and Léon Walras. Until then economists had been
perplexed by the paradox which resulted from the fact that, although
iron is unquestionably more *necessary* and more *useful* than gold, the
latter is nevertheless more highly esteemed, greater value is attached
to it, and it commands a higher price in the market. The economists who
formulated the theory of marginal utility took account of the fact that
economic utility is the power to satisfy any want, even though the
latter may be altogether capricious, like the vanity of wearing jewelry.
Hence, the difference between the utility of iron and that of gold is
not determined by comparing the serviceability of *all* the gold and
*all* the iron in the world, but consists in the difference between the
economic services, expressed in terms of supply and demand, that can be
rendered by the *last available unit* of the one or the other metal.
Consequently, even though an iron or a steel building is objectively
more useful than a gold wristwatch, since iron is much more abundant
than gold, it is natural that the last available unit of gold in the
market should be economically much more useful
and in demand, and therefore much more costly in terms of money, than
the last unit of iron.

The theory of marginal utility demonstrates, in effect, that the
economic measure of the utility of a thing is a function of its scarcity
in relation to the needs of the market. Though advertising may sometimes
succeed in creating in the consumers a need for certain things, the
entrepreneur must still take into account, in calculating the
probability of success in the market, the concept of the utility of his
product in terms of public demand rather than his own ideas of its
usefulness. It makes no sense to go to the market to offer chewing gum
to those who want to buy tobacco, however innocuous the former may be
and however harmful the latter. The truth of this law and the relativity
involved in its application are confirmed by what happened during the
first World War. In the middle of the war Germany found itself short of
many things, among them iron, the supply of which was almost completely
exhausted, while coal was abundant. As its geographical and military
situation enabled it to make imports, which it needed to pay for in
gold, the government made an appeal to the patriotism of the German
people, and they responded by giving up their gold jewels in exchange
for garish iron imitations that carried engraved on them the phrase, "I
have given gold for iron." Practically no gold was left in Germany in
private hands. But there was also a great scarcity of iron and other
metallic objects, especially kitchen utensils. People valued iron highly
and preferred it to any gold jewel that could be offered to them. For
several years in Germany the marginal utility of iron was much greater
than that of gold.

The *law of diminishing returns*, more recently known simply as *the law
of returns* or also as *the law of the proportionality of the factors of
production*, was first formulated by economists in its application to
land. They noted that the yield from a given piece of land could be
increased by the application of labor and other means of production such
as machines and fertilizers, but only up to a certain point. Beyond this
the increased expenditure invested in its more intensive exploitation
was not translated into a corresponding
increase in production, but resulted simply in an increase in unit
costs: the land no longer yielded more, but, in a certain sense, less,
because the product became more costly once the point had been passed at
which the land had yielded its *optimum return*. Hence one spoke of
"diminishing returns."

Later it was observed that this law is applicable to any and every form
of production. In a shoe factory, for example, the employment of more
modern machinery, an increase in the number of workers, the utilization
of more or better auxiliary materials, such as dyes, lubricants, etc.,
will result in an increase in the net return more or less in proportion
to the means employed. But a time will come when the optimum return is
obtained, and if one seeks to go beyond this point with a more lavish
use of the means of production, the return, instead of rising, will
fall. This is something that needs to be carefully taken into account by
the entrepreneur in making his economic calculation. He will have to pay
heed to the particular circumstances of time and place in which
production is to be carried on (such as the kind of motive power that is
available; the supply, the quality, and the price of industrial labor;
the cost of auxiliary materials; etc.), and he must calculate or
discover by experience the precise combination of all the factors of
production that, in the given time and place, will produce the optimum
yield. If he does not do this and allows himself to be dazzled by
appearances, by the example of other countries or other times, etc.,
then he runs the risk of obtaining, instead of a greater, a lesser
return on his investment, to his own detriment and that of the market.

---

Among the problems of economic calculation confronting the entrepreneur,
that of time stands in the forefront. Indeed, one might go so far as to
say that entrepreneurial activity consists essentially in *the struggle
against time*.

The economy is not something static, knowledge of which, once acquired,
holds good forever. It is, on the contrary, a living thing which
undergoes continuous variations, and consequently
the data of the market today are not what they
were yesterday or what they will be tomorrow. The raw materials
available, technical advances, and the way of life, the tastes, and the
wants of the consumers are constantly changing. On the other hand, a
very important role in the economic calculation of the entrepreneur is
played by the *rhythm of production*. By this is understood not only
production properly so called, but also the process of distribution
involved in bringing a particular thing or service to the ultimate
consumer, for until this point is reached, an investment of capital and
labor still has to be made; only when a commodity reaches the market can
its price be determined. Corresponding to the greater or lesser rapidity
of this rhythm will be the greater or lesser amount of circulating
capital needed by the entrepreneur; an error in the calculation of this
amount can lead to the failure of the enterprise.

The entrepreneur has to foresee the rhythm of his *turnover* so that he
can calculate and make provision for the amount of the circulating
capital that the enterprise is going to need. At the same time, he must
also calculate the quantity of immobile means of production that he
needs, which will determine the amount of fixed capital to be invested
in the business. But this foresight must likewise extend, so far as
possible, into *the future configuration of the market*: he has, in a
certain sense, to foretell whether and how long the production that he
wishes to undertake will find a market, whether the demand for his
product will increase or diminish, whether prices will rise or fall in
the course of time. This will tell him how far he can or ought to *risk*
the available capital, how rapidly he has to amortize fixed investments,
and many other things determining the volume and character of his
business.

---

It is easy to understand, then, that none of these many calculations,
which in their totality constitute economic calculation, can be exact:
all are *calculations of probabilities*, and, a fortiori, so is the
total economic calculation.

*Statistics*, provided always that they are exact and rightly
interpreted, *tell us only what has happened up to the present,
not what will happen tomorrow*. Technological
progress is not always predictable: revolutionary inventions sometimes
come like a bolt from the blue; political or international events
occasionally destroy in an unforeseen and unforeseeable way all the
hopes based on the availability and price of raw materials; and it is
even more difficult to anticipate the reactions of the consumers to
these events. Who would have expected, for example, that at the outbreak
of the First World War, when a scarcity of textiles became evident,
women would persist in their refusal to wear short, narrow skirts and
demand long, wide ones? However many data the entrepreneur takes into
account in undertaking or managing his business---commercial geography,
history and statistics, books and periodicals on the latest
technological advances and those continually in progress---his decisions
will always come up against an unknown quantity that he will have to
determine by *intuition* on his own responsibility and in the spirit of
adventure: he knows what happened yesterday and today, but tomorrow is
in the hands of Providence. In a word: *every enterprise*, every
business, every economic act in general, because it occurs and develops
in time as well as in space, *is necessarily a speculation that can
result in profit, but can also result in loss*.

Production, around which all economic life revolves, is, then, the great
adventure of mankind: it is the struggle with tomorrow, the struggle
with the unknown. The champion, the hero, and frequently the victim in
this struggle is the entrepreneur. He undertakes some enterprise in
quest of profit. But in order to obtain it, he is obliged to satisfy the
consumer, that is to say, the public in general. Competition takes care
of this. The consumer never loses. The entrepreneur, on the other hand,
can see all his hopes of profit transformed into a loss that he alone
must bear: the profit that the consumers (the general public) made is
theirs to keep, while the entrepreneur is ruined. *This is an
unavoidable necessity*. We have already seen that it cannot be avoided
by any scientific cognition because the future is an unknown quantity
that eludes every calculation and all foresight.

But can all this be avoided by political means? We shall concern
ourselves later with the proposals that have
been advanced and even tried with this object in view, whether by way of
a change in the whole economic system or by way of corrective measures
designed to overcome the alleged "weaknesses of free enterprise." But
here we can already anticipate this much: *What the entrepreneur cannot
foresee, nobody can foresee*, because, as we have said, science is
impotent in the face of the unknown. The only thing that the state can
do is to extricate the individual entrepreneur from his loss by
depriving him of his profit, that is to say, *to assume the risk of the
entrepreneur*, or rather, to make the general public take the risk,
because the state has no other resources than those it takes from the
people. In this dilemma, it would appear to be more sensible for the
entrepreneur to run the risk rather than the general public.
