---
layout: narrative
title: "What Is Economics About?"
author: "Faustino Ballvé"
editor: Jack VanDrunen
rights: All Rights Reserved
source: Ludwig von Mises Institute
publication-date: 1963
order: 4
---

*Economic activity. Economic thought. Xenophon, Aristotle, Rome, St.
Thomas, Oresmius, Biel, Erasmus, Luther, Calvin. Mercantilism. The
physiocrats. Adam Smith and the classical school. Nationalism. The
Historical School. Socialism. The controlled economy. The Austrian
School. The Mathematical School. The Critical School. The domain of the
economic: action chosen by man in the market*.

As far back as we go in our study of the way mankind has lived, from the
earliest reaches of recorded history and even from the times of the
prehistoric monuments studied by archeology, we find men applying their
labor to the resources of Nature in order to satisfy their needs. That
is to say, we find them producing---even if only by bagging game or
catching fish or gathering from fields and forests the wood and the wild
fruits they found growing there, transporting these to the place where
they were to be consumed, and then treating them as marketable
commodities---and we find them exchanging their produce with other men,
whether directly by barter or indirectly through the medium of a neutral
commodity, viz., money. We find them, too, competing in offer and
demand, according to the conditions of scarcity or abundance in the
supply of specific goods, and exercising the right of choice---the
producer producing what he expects will yield him the greatest profit,
and the consumer buying what seems to him cheapest and most suitable to
his needs. We also find them holding on to
goods or money, sometimes with the object of securing a greater
advantage later, sometimes with that of building up a reserve for hard
times. We find those in possession of goods or money lending, for some
consideration, what they could spare to those in urgent need of it, and
we find different people banding together for production or consumption.

All these human activities, consisting in the exercise of individual
initiative and of the faculty of choice for the satisfaction of wants
and the improvement of what we call today the standard of living, are,
in a more or less primitive and undeveloped form, as old as mankind.
Their modern forms are every day being extended from the advanced to the
backward countries at the same time that their primitive forms persist
into the present day. Indeed, the latter are still current among
civilized peoples, as we see in the recrudescence of barter during and
after the war even among nations as enlightened as France, Germany, and
the United States.[^fn1]

From the earliest times, too, this manifestation of human activity has
engaged the minds of scholars and thinkers. To go no further back than
the days of ancient
Greece,[^fn2] Plato concerned
himself with the division of labor and of the various occupations;
Xenophon dealt with the increase in rents in Attica and formulated a
theory of money; Aristotle spoke of the *chrematistic* occupations,
expressed the hope that slave labor might be replaced by machinery, and
anticipated the distinction that Adam Smith was to make twenty-two
centuries later between value in use and value in exchange. Rome made
the protection of agriculture an economic policy---one that was
supported in the Middle Ages by the Catholic Church's condemnation of
trade, its prohibition on the charging of interest, which it
characterized as usury, its repudiation of value in exchange, and its
refusal to accept, as the basis for prices, anything but value in use.

St. Thomas Aquinas advocated a kind of communism that was later, from
1610 to 1766, to be practiced by the Jesuits of Paraguay. The French
bishop Nicholas Oresmius published a treatise on money, and Gabriel Biel
of Württemberg made investigations into the nature of money and the
formation of prices.

Humanism, with Erasmus, esteemed commerce as
honorable. Martin Luther, the founder of Protestantism, postulated that
"man was born to work," studied the division of labor, and stressed the
importance and utility of trade, recommending the free market even
though he continued to condemn "usury." On this last point Calvin
disagreed with Luther and was, besides, the first to advocate the
intervention of the state in economic life---an intervention that
already existed in his age and, to a greater or lesser degree, has
always existed and in the last thirty years has been considered as an
economic panacea.

The establishment of absolute monarchies in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries and the rise of modern nations imbued with an
ardent and youthful spirit of nationalism produced at the same time a
control over economic activity and a theoretical justification of that
control that is known historically as *mercantilism*. Its fundamental
principles, of which those of the present age, aptly called
*neomercantilist*, remind us, are: the direction of economic life by the
public authorities, the consideration of money as true wealth, a concern
with a favorable balance of payments with the object of obtaining more
money in international exchange, the protection of industry for the
purpose of having articles of export in order to bring money into the
country, a system of subsidies and privileges for exporters and for
industries producing for export or avoiding imports, an increase in the
population in order to augment the productive forces of the domestic
economy, competition with and isolation of foreigners by means of tariff
barriers, and, above all, the belief that the prosperity of one country
is possible only at the expense of the others.

These were the principles that inspired the regulation of economic life
by the omnipotent governments of the sixteenth to the eighteenth century
and were developed, albeit with considerable differences of detail, by
Serra, Broggia, and Genovesi in Italy; by Francis Bacon (Lord Verulam),
Thomas Mun, Child, and Temple in England (while Sir Walter Raleigh
attributed the economic superiority of Holland to its greater economic
freedom); by Melon and Forbonnais in France; by Klock, Seckendorff,
Becher, and Baron von Schoeder in Germany; and
by Luis Ortiz, Moncada, Damián de Olivares, Gracián Serran, Jerónimo
Ustariz, and Bernardo de Ulloa in Spain. The statesman who has come to
be regarded as the most representative historical exemplar of this
tendency is Colbert, the minister of Louis XIV.

The mercantilist system led to disastrous consequences; for the
fragmentation of economic and political groups ended by strangulating
general economic life and producing internal misery and external war.
The example of Holland led Queen Elizabeth of England to grant greater
freedom to commerce and to reduce the importance of the guilds.
Incipient liberalism, supported by the doctrine of natural law,
immediately inspired a critique of the whole mercantilist system and a
scientific trend in the opposite direction that is known as the
*physiocratic* school. Its initiators were Pierre de Boisguillebert,
Marshal Vauban, and, above all, Quesnay, personal physician to Louis XV.
They were followed by Vincent Gournay, the elder Mirabeau, and, to some
extent, the celebrated statesman Turgot.

As its name indicates, this doctrine was founded on the principle that
there are *natural laws* of economic life that operate automatically.
The evils of mercantilism come from interference with these laws on the
part of the state. Hence, it is advisable to abstain from all regulation
of economic activity and to leave it entirely to individual initiative.
This principle Gournay reduced to the celebrated phrase: *laissez faire,
laissez passer*.

The physiocratic doctrine, in so far as it was a reaction against
mercantilism, found propitious soil in England. There neither the
mercantilist worship of money nor the veneration of agriculture as the
sole foundation of national wealth, which the physiocrats had taken over
from the canonists, had ever completely prevailed. However, the English
did not content themselves with the mere affirmation of the existence of
natural laws with whose operation the state ought not to interfere, but
wanted to investigate these laws and determine what they are; and thus
they gave the world the so-called *classical school* of economics. The
way was opened by Hutcheson and David Hume, who
in turn influenced Adam Smith, the author of the first treatise on
economics properly so called, entitled *Inquiry into the Nature and
Causes of the Wealth of Nations* (1776). In England David Ricardo and,
to a certain extent, both James Mill and his son John, in France
Jean-Baptiste Say and Frédéric Bastiat, and in Germany Henry and J. H.
von Thünen, Rau, Hermann, and Nebenius took their inspiration from
Smith.

A discordant note was struck in England by Robert Malthus, an Anglican
curate, with his theory that population tends to increase faster than
the means of subsistence. He advised recourse to measures designed to
avoid the disastrous consequences of simply allowing the laws of nature
to run their course. In the United States the classical doctrine was
embraced by Franklin and Hamilton (who was, notwithstanding, a
protectionist). The chief exponents in Spain were José Alonso Ortiz, who
translated Smith's work and wrote a commentary on it, and Alvaro Flores
Estrada, who nevertheless also initiated the movement of agrarian reform
that almost a century later was to bring renown to the American Henry
George.

The apogee of the classical school coincided with the fabulous increase
in production and international exchange consequent upon the
introduction of machinery (the Industrial
Revolution)[^fn3] and the
improvement of communications. But three circumstances brought the
classical doctrine into disrepute. The first was the discovery that what
had been taken for laws presumably deducible from the observation of
economic phenomena in a limited geographical area (England and France in
particular), and about which there was considerable disagreement among
the adherents of the classical school, were not really laws at all, but
mere regularities that, when treated as infallible laws, often failed in
their application. The second was the inferior competitive position in
which the younger countries, especially Germany and the United States,
felt themselves to be on the world market. The third was the general
opinion, more or less well founded, but disseminated by propaganda and
unreflectingly accepted by the intellectuals
and the middle class, that the lower classes and especially the workers
were not benefiting from the material progress engendered by free
enterprise.

Hence arose three counter movements: *nationalist* protectionism,
launched in Germany by Frederick List, of which the last and most
eminent representative was Adolf Wagner (a policy advocated in the
United States by Henry Carey and in England by the elder Chamberlain and
the adherents of the *tariff-reform* movement); *socialism* in its
diverse forms, of which the most prominent was the so-called "scientific
socialism" of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels; and the so-called
*Historical School* (Bruno Hildebrand, Knies, Roscher, Schmoller),
itself a reflection of both romanticism and the positivism of Auguste
Comte, according to which every country has its particular economy
corresponding to its conditions and traditions and serving the national
interest rather than that of the individual. These three trends of
thought, including the socialist, which originally had a cosmopolitan
character, tended toward acceptance of the myth of national wealth, to
which they subordinated that of the individual, and in whose defense
they affirmed that all measures are legitimate in the name of "sacred
egoism."

It is curious to note that these doctrines, which called themselves
"modern," and which we shall study in detail later, in spite of their
professed opposition to classical liberalism, all (including Marxian
socialism) followed in its footsteps and are not so much its adversaries
as its offspring. In the first place, they conceive of the theme of
economics, not as man's universal struggle for well-being, but as
national, *political* economy. Thus, quite recently, Professor Fuchs, of
Germany, has defined political
economy[^fn4] as "the study of
the economy of a people" and considered its function to be that of the
"ever increasing support and ever more perfect satisfaction of the
necessities of a growing population in a given territory." In the second
place, these doctrines do not grasp the economy in its unity and
totality, but continue to treat distribution and consumption separately
and without any connection, as if they were independent entities and not
merely parts of a general process. In the third place, they
persist in the belief in the existence of laws
that control the economic process independently of the will of man.
Thus, Marx himself---contrary to all previous as well as all subsequent
experience---conceived of the historical course of economic development
as presided over by the great law of the concentration of capital, by
virtue of which wealth is every day becoming concentrated in fewer hands
while the "army of the proletariat" increases, until the inevitable
moment comes when "the expropriators will be expropriated."

It did not occur to the exponents of these doctrines that economic
events are not inevitable, but the product of man's free will; that
production, distribution, and consumption are simply different aspects
of a single economic process; that, in spite of nationalistic and
isolationist experiments, the economy of the whole world constitutes a
unified totality; or; finally, that no law or government has succeeded
or indeed can succeed in preventing every man from striving after his
own and his loved ones' earthly well-being in the way he considers most
suitable by making use of his faculty of free choice (the natural
corollary of his liberty, as we see in the activities of smugglers in
contravention of the laws limiting international trade and in the
so-called "black market" in violation of the legal restrictions on
domestic commerce).

These three "modern" tendencies---distrust of individual initiative,
exacerbated nationalism (called *chauvinism* after the ultranationalist
French Bonapartist Chauvin), and socialism---were, for all practical
purposes, combined, at the end of the nineteenth century and the
beginning of the twentieth, in *neomercantilism*. This began in the
Germany of Bismarck and in the United States, spread by reaction to
England, France, and other countries, produced the two world wars, and
destroyed the international division of labor. Christened in Germany in
1920 the "planned economy" (*Planwirtschaft*) and later everywhere
called the "controlled economy," under the pretext of defending national
interests against foreign competition and the humbler classes against
domestic oppression, it has enthroned the *omnipotent state* wherever it
has gained a foothold and has forced democracy
and liberty, whose universal victory was once thought to have been
finally assured, into retreat.

But the love of liberty is no less imperishable than the love of
knowledge, that is, the unprejudiced and fearless quest for truth. It
was this strictly scientific spirit that inspired Carl Menger, around
1870, to undertake a revision of the prevailing economic doctrines with
the object of placing economics on a truly scientific foundation.

Menger, a Viennese professor of economics, formulated the theory of
*marginal utility
(Grenznutztheorie)*[^fn5]
almost at the same time as Stanley Jevons did in England and Léon Walras
in France. From it issued two distinct currents of thought: the
Mathematical School and the so-called "Austrian" School represented by
Menger himself, Böhm-Bawerk, Wieser, and others, and at present by
Ludwig von Mises, author of *Human
Action*,[^fn6] and his pupil,
Friedrich von Hayek, author of the famous book entitled *The Road to
Serfdom*.[^fn7] Both are today
professors in the United States with an increasingly large number of
disciples, and supporting their position is the American economist Henry
Hazlitt, author of the famous *Economics in One
Lesson*.[^fn8]

The Mathematical School, which reached its height in the work of the
French economist Cournot, has given rise to two divergent streams of
thought: one branch, starting with Walras, Pareto, and Pantaleoni, has
developed so-called "econometrics," which professes to be able to attain
complete exactitude in economic calculation and is the chief bulwark of
the ideology of central economic planning at the present
time;[^fn9] while the other,
starting with the English economist Marshall, uses mathematics solely as
a graphic means of expressing economic doctrines without pretending in
any way to have made of economics an "exact science." Among these
mathematical economists should be mentioned John Bates Clark and Irving
Fisher.

Walter Eucken and Wilhelm Röpke, both German (although the latter has
done most of his work in Egypt and Switzerland), represent a liberal,
nonmathematical tendency. In France, which has maintained a high rank in
economic science, the liberal movement is represented by such eminent
figures as Charles Gide, Rist, and, more
recently, Jacques Rueff, Louis Baudin, Pierre Lhoste-Lachaume, and many
others.

Several other contemporary schools of economic thought could be
mentioned, like that of "dynamic" economics, which originated in the
Scandinavian countries, and of which Schumpeter (an Austrian who died
recently in the United States) is a representative; but they have no
definite form or any significant influence. On the other hand, it is
noteworthy that Ludwig von Mises and his disciples represent a
considerable advance over their predecessors of the so-called "Austrian"
School; in fact, they can be considered as the founders of an altogether
new school that could well be called "critical."

According to this strictly scientific new school of thought, *the
economic domain is constituted by human action directed toward the
satisfaction of wants by the exercise of the power of choice. Economics
is, accordingly, the study of this economic activity on the part of
man*. It is not concerned with philosophical or moral problems, since
*economic science is not adjudicative, but descriptive*. Nor, by the
same token, does economics deal with political problems, since *the
economist does not give advice:* he confines himself strictly to
explicating the nature of economic activity, leaving it to the good
sense of the statesman and the citizen in general to draw from this
knowledge whatever consequences may recommend themselves. Finally,
economics pays no attention to historical problems, since *history tells
us*---and therein it can serve as an adjunct to political
science---*only what has been*, but not what is, much less what will be.
Nor can statistics, which refers only to past events, be anything more
than an adjunct to history.

It is thus that we arrive at the unique domain that constitutes the true
subject matter of economic science. Because economic activity takes
place in time and space, it involves concurrences, contrarieties, and
concatenations of events. These *external variations* are the proper
subject matter of *history* and of *economic geography*. But behind
these variations reflection discovers (though not by a process of mere
observation and comparison) certain uniform and invariant aspects of
man's economic activity, of which we have
cited a few examples at the beginning of this chapter. These *general
and constant forms* of man's economic activity *constitute the subject
matter of economic science*, while its variations in time and space
constitute the field proper to geography and history.

Having thus set forth, in necessarily brief form, the nature and history
of economics, and the true character of its subject matter, we propose
to take up in turn, in the nine succeeding chapters, the study of the
various topics into which this subject can be broken down, the questions
to which they give rise, as well as the various solutions that have been
suggested to present-day economic problems, and to criticize these from
the scientific point of view. The topics of these chapters will be: (2)
the market (the division of labor, competition, value, and price); (3)
the role of the entrepreneur and economic calculation; (4) capital,
labor, and wages; (5) money, credit, and interest; (6) monopolies,
crises, and unemployment; (7) international trade; (8) nationalism and
socialism; (9) the controlled economy; and (10) what economics is *not*
about.

[^fn1]:
    Heinrich Cunow,
    *Allgemeine Wirtschaftsgeschichte; eine übersicht über die
    Wirtschaftsentwicklung von der primitiven Sammelwirtschaft bis zum
    Hochkapitalismus* (Berlin: J. H. W. Dietz Nachfolger, 1926--1931).

[^fn2]:
    We follow here Joseph
    Conrad, *Historia de la economía* (Spanish translation from the German
    published by Librerías de Victoriano Suárez, Madrid, and Agustín Bosch,
    Barcelona).

[^fn3]:
    *See* Thomas S. Ashton,
    *The Industrial Revolution* (London: A. & C. Black, Ltd., 1937).

[^fn4]:
    Karl Fuchs,
    *Volkswirtschaftslehre* (Berlin: W. de Gruyter & Co., 1925).

[^fn5]:
    See chap. 3.

[^fn6]:
    New Haven: Yale
    University Press, 1949.

[^fn7]:
    Chicago: Chicago
    University Press, 1944.

[^fn8]:
    New York and London:
    Harper & Brothers, 1946; Irvington-on-Hudson, New York: Foundation for
    Economic Education, 1952.

[^fn9]:
    See chap. 9.
